{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff4\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times;}
{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Helvetica;}{\f6\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Geneva;}
{\f8\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Tms Rmn;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helv;}{\f10\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Serif;}
{\f11\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}MS Sans Serif;}{\f12\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}New York;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}System;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05000000000000000000}Wingdings;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604030504040204}Tahoma;}{\f16\fmodern\fcharset128\fprq1{\*\panose 020b0609070205080204}MS Gothic{\*\falt \'82l\'82r \'83S\'83V\'83b\'83N};}
{\f17\fmodern\fcharset128\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}@MS Gothic;}{\f18\froman\fcharset177\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f19\froman\fcharset178\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times New Roman (Arabic);}
{\f20\froman\fcharset163\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica (Hebrew);}
{\f22\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica (Arabic);}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica (Vietnamese);}{\f24\froman\fcharset177\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times (Hebrew);}
{\f25\froman\fcharset178\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times (Arabic);}{\f26\froman\fcharset163\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Times (Vietnamese);}{\f27\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f28\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f30\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f31\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f32\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f34\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f36\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f37\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f38\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f51\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times CE;}
{\f52\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times Cyr;}{\f54\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times Greek;}{\f55\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times Tur;}{\f56\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times Baltic;}{\f57\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Helvetica CE;}
{\f58\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Helvetica Cyr;}{\f60\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Helvetica Greek;}{\f61\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Helvetica Tur;}{\f62\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Helvetica Baltic;}{\f117\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Tahoma CE;}
{\f118\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Tahoma Cyr;}{\f120\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Tahoma Greek;}{\f121\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Tahoma Tur;}{\f122\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Tahoma Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f4\fs28\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{
\s2\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel1\adjustright \b\f4\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext15 footnote text;}{\*\cs16 \additive \super \sbasedon10 
footnote reference;}{\s17\widctlpar\adjustright \cbpat9 \cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext17 Document Map;}{\s18\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright \f4\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext18 header;}{\s19\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright \f4\cgrid 
\sbasedon0 \snext19 footer;}}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\info{\title The Grounds of Christianity}{\author Charles Klingman}{\operator David Widger}{\creatim\yr2005\mo5\dy31\hr12\min4}{\revtim\yr2005\mo6\dy1\hr13}{\version3}{\edmins3}{\nofpages142}{\nofwords62842}
{\nofchars358202}{\*\company U.S. Treasury Department}{\nofcharsws439897}{\vern89}}{\*\userprops {\propname _AdHocReviewCycleID}\proptype3{\staticval 704070441}{\propname _EmailSubject}\proptype30{\staticval Bethune English1.doc}{\propname _AuthorEmail}
\proptype30{\staticval Charles.Klingman@do.treas.gov}{\propname _AuthorEmailDisplayName}\proptype30{\staticval Klingman, Charles}{\propname _PreviousAdHocReviewCycleID}\proptype3{\staticval 704070441}}
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s1\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel0\adjustright \b\f4\fs28\cgrid {\b0\f0 The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Grounds of Christianity Examined by
\par Comparing The New Testament with the Old, by George Bethune English
\par 
\par This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
\par almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
\par re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
\par with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net
\par 
\par 
\par Title: The Grounds of Christianity Examined by Comparing The New Testament with the Old
\par 
\par Author: George Bethune English
\par 
\par Release Date: June 1, 2005 [EBook #15968]
\par 
\par Language: English
\par 
\par Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1
\par 
\par *** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GROUNDS OF CHRISTIANITY ***
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Produced by Charles Klingman
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b0\f0 The Grounds of Christianity
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0\fs28 Examined by Comparing
\par The New Testament with the Old
\par by
\par George Bethune English, A.M.
\par 
\par }{\f0 \ldblquote First understand, then judge.\rdblquote 
\par \ldblquote Bring forth the people blind, although they have eyes;
\par And deaf, although they have ears.
\par Let them produce their witnesses, that they may be justified;
\par Or let them hear  their turn, and say, }{\scaps\f0 this is true.\rdblquote 
\par \tab Isaiah.
\par 
\par }{\f0 
\par Boston 1813
\par 
\par \page To the Intelligent and the Candid
\par Who are
\par Willing to Listen to Every Opinion
\par That is Supported by Reason;
\par And
\par Not Averse to Bringing their Own Opinions
\par To the Test of Examination;
\par }\pard\plain \s2\keepn\widctlpar\outlinelevel1\adjustright \b\f4\cgrid {\b0\f0 THIS BOOK
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 Is Respectfully Dedicated
\par By
\par The Author
\par }\pard \qc\widctlpar\adjustright {\f0 \page }{\caps\f0\fs28 Contents
\par }\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {\f0 
\par Chapter I.
\par Introductory,  -- Showing that the Apostles and Authors of the New Testament endeavour to prove Christianity from the Old.
\par 
\par Chapter II.
\par Statement of the Question in Dispute.
\par 
\par Chapter III.
\par The Characteristics of the Messiah, as given by the Hebrew Prophets.
\par 
\par Chapter IV.
\par The character of Jesus tested by those characteristic marks of the messiah, given by the Prophets of the Old Testament.
\par 
\par Chapter V.
\par Examination of the arguments from the Old Testament adduced in the New, to prove that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah.
\par 
\par Chapter VI.
\par Examination of the meaning of the phrase \ldblquote this was done that it might be fulfilled.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Chapter VII.
\par Examination of the arguments alledged from the Hebrew Prophets, to prove that Jesus was the Messiah.
\par 
\par Chapter VIII.
\par Statement of Arguments which prove that Jesus was not the Messiah of the Old Testament.
\par 
\par Chapter IX.
\par On the character of Jesus of Nazareth, and the weight to be allowed to the argument of martyrdom, as a test of truth, in this question.
\par 
\par Chapter X.
\par Miscellaneous.
\par 
\par Chapter XI.
\par Whether the Mosaic Law be represented in the Old Testament as a temporary, or a perpetual institution.
\par 
\par Chapter XII.
\par On the character of Paul, and his manner of reasoning.
\par 
\par Chapter XIII.
\par Examination of some doctrines in the New testament, derived from the Cabbala, the Oriental philosophy, and the tenets of Zoroaster.
\par 
\par Chapter XIV.
\par A consideration of the \ldblquote gift of tongues,\rdblquote  and other miraculous powers, ascribed to the Primitive Christians; and whether recorded miracles are infallible proofs of the Divine Authority of doctrines said to have been confirmed by them.

\par 
\par Chapter XV.
\par Application of the two tests, said in Deuteronomy to have been given by God as discriminating a true prophet from a false one, to the character and actions of Jesus.
\par 
\par Chapter XVI.
\par Examination of the evidence, external and internal, in favour of the credibility of the Gospel history.
\par 
\par Chapter XVII.
\par On the peculiar morality of the New Testament, as it affects nations and political societies.
\par 
\par Chapter XIX.
\par A consideration of some supposed advantages attributed to the New, over the Old, testament; and whether the doctrine of a Resurrection and a Life to Come, is not taught by the Old testament, in contradiction the assertion, that \ldblquote 
life and immorality were brought to light by the Gospel.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Conclusion
\par 
\par Appendix
\par 
\par Addenda
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\widctlpar\adjustright {\f0 \page }{\f0\fs28 PREFACE
\par }\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {\f0 
\par }\pard \fi720\widctlpar\adjustright {\f0 The celebrated Dr. Price, in his valuable \ldblquote Observation on the Importance of the American Revolution}{\cs16\f0\super \chftn {\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super \chftn }
{ }{\fs20 Published 1785.
\par }}}{\f0 ,\rdblquote  addressed to the people of the United States, observes that, \ldblquote 
It is a common opinion, that there are some doctrines so sacred, and others of so bad a tendency, that no public discussion of them ought to be allowed. Were this a right opinion, }{\i\f0 all the perse
cution that has ever been practised would be justified;}{\f0  for if it is a part of the duty of civil magistrates to prevent the discussion of such doctrines, they must, in doing this, act on their own judgments}{\i\f0  of}{\f0  the nature and }{\i\f0 
tendency}{\f0  of doctrines; and, con
sequently, they must have a right to prevent the discussion of all doctrines which they think to be too sacred for discussion, or too dangerous in their tendency; and this right they must exercise in the only way in which civil power is capable of exercis
ing it\emdash ' by inflicting penalties upon all who oppose sacred doctrines, or who maintain pernicious opinions.' In }{\i\f0 Mahometan,}{\f0  countries, therefore, magistrates would have a }{\i\f0 right to}{\f0 
 silence and punish all who oppose the divine mission of }{\i\f0 Mahomet,}{\f0  a doctrine there reckoned of the most sacred nature. The like is true of the doctrines of transubstantiation, worship of the Virgin Mary, &c. &c., in }{\i\f0 Popish}{\f0 
 countries; and of the doctrines of the Trinity, satisfaction, &c., in }{\i\f0 Protestant}{\f0  countries.  All such laws are }{\i\f0 right,}{\f0 
 if the opinion I have mentioned is right. But, in reality, civil power has nothing to do in such matters, and civil governors go miserably out of their proper province, whenever they take upon them the care of truth, or the support of any doctrinal p
oints. They are not judges of truth, and if they pretend to decide about it, they will decide wrong.  This all the countries under heaven think of the application of civil power to doctrinal points in every country, but their own. It is indeed superstitio
n
, idolatry, and nonsense, that civil power at present supports almost every where under the idea of supporting sacred truth, and opposing dangerous error. Would not, therefore, its perfect neutrality be the greatest blessing ?  Would not the interest of t
ruth gain unspeakably, were all the rulers of states to aim at nothing but keeping the peace; or did they consider themselves bound to take care, not of the}{\i\f0  future,}{\f0  but the }{\i\f0 present,}{\f0  interest of man; not of their }{\i\f0 souls}{
\f0  and of their }{\i\f0 faith,}{\f0  but of their }{\i\f0 person}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 property ;}{\f0  not of any }{\i\f0 ecclesiastical,}{\f0  but }{\i\f0 secular,}{\f0  matters only ?\rdblquote 
\par }\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {\f0 
\par \ldblquote All the experience }{\i\f0 of past time}{\f0  proves, that the consequence of allowing civil power to judge of the nature and tendency of doctrines, must be making it a hindrance to the progress o
f truth, and an enemy to the improvement of the world.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote I would extend these observations to all points of faith, however sacred they may: be deemed. Nothing }{\i\f0 reasonable}{\f0  --can suffer by discussion. All doctrines, }{\i\f0 really}{\f0  sacred, must be }{\i\f0 clear,}{\f0  and incapabl
e of being opposed with success.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote That }{\i\f0 immoral tendency}{\f0  of doctrines, which has been urged as a reason against allowing the public discussion of them, may be either avowed and direct? or only a consequence with which they are charged. If it is avowed and
 direct, such doctrines certainly will not spread; the principles rooted, in human nature will resist them, and the advocates of them will be soon disgraced. If, on the contrary, it is only a consequence with which a doctrine is charged, it should be cons
i
dered how apt all parties are to charge the doctrines they oppose with bad tendencies. It is well known that Calvinists and Arminians, Trinitarians and Socinians, Fatalists and Free-Willers, are continually exclaiming against one another's opinions, as da
n
gerous and licentious. Even Christianity itself could not, at its first introduction, escape this accusation. The professors of it were considered as atheists, because they opposed pagan idolatry; and their religion was, on this account, reckoned a destru
ctive and pernicious enthusiasm. If, therefore, the rulers of a state are to prohibit the propagation of all doctrines, in which they apprehend immoral tendencies, an opening will be made, as I have before observed, for }{\i\f0 
every species of persecution.}{\f0  There will be no doctrine, however true or important, the avowal of which will not, in, some country or other, be subjected to civil penalties.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par These observations bear the stamp of good sense, and their truth has been abundantly confirmed by experience; and it 
is the peculiar honour of the United States, that in conformity with the principles of these observations, perfect freedom, of opinion and of speech, are here }{\i\f0 established by law, }{\f0 and are the }{\i\f0 birthright}{\f0 
 of every citizen thereof. Our country}{\cs16\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{\f0\fs20   In the presen
t day, various-attempts, insidious and powerful, have been made, even here, to coerce in matters of conscience, and to overthrow those wise barriers to the destructive effects of sectarian fanaticism and intolerance, which the great founders of the Republ
ic, to their everlasting glory, erected.\emdash D.
\par }}}{\f0  is the on
ly one which has not been guilty of the folly of establishing the ascendancy of one set of religious opinions, and persecuting or tolerating all others, and which does not permit any man to harass his neighbour, because he thinks differently from himself.
 
In consequence of these excellent institutions, difference of religious sentiment; makes here no breach in private friendship, and works no danger to the public security. This is as it should be; for, in matters of opinion, especially with regard to so im
portant a thing as religion, it is every man's }{\i\f0 natural right}{\f0 
 and duty to think for himself, and to judge upon such evidence as he can procure, after he has used his best endeavours to get information. Human decisions are of no weight in this matter, for ano
ther man has no more right to. determine what his opinions shall be, than I have to determine what another man\rquote 
s opinions shall be.  It is amazing that one man can dare to presume he has such a right over another; and that any man can be so weak and credulous, as to imagine, that another has such right over him.
\par 
\par As it is every man's }{\i\f0 natural right}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 duty}{\f0  to think and judge for himself in matters of opinion; so he should be allowed freely to bring forward and defend his opinions, and to endeavour, when be 
judges proper, to convince others also of their truth.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 For unless all men are allowed freely to profess their opinions, the means of information, with respect to opinions, must, in a great measure, be wanting; and just inquiries into their truth be almost
 impracticable; and, by consequence, our natural }{\i\f0 right}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 duty}{\f0 
 to think and judge for ourselves, must be rendered almost nugatory, or be subverted, for want of materials whereon to employ our minds. A man by himself, without communication with other minds
, can make no great progress in knowledge; and besides, an individual is }{\i\f0 indisposed}{\f0 
 to use his own strength, when an undisturbed laziness, ignorance, and prejudice give him full satisfaction as to the truth of his opinions. But if there be a free professio
n, or communication of sentiment, every man will have an opportunity of acquainting himself with all that can be known from others; .and many for their own satisfaction will make inquiries, and, in order to ascertain the truth of opinions, will desire to 
know all that can be said on any question.
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 
\par If such liberty of professing and teaching be not allowed, error, if authorized, will keep its ground; and truth, if dormant, will never be brought to light; or, if authorized, will be supported on a false and abs
urd foundation, and such as would equally support error; and, if received on the ground of authority, will not be in the least meritorious to its professors.
\par 
\par Besides, not to encourage capable and honest men to profess and defend their opinions when differ
ent from ours, is to distrust the truth of our own opinion, and to fear the light.  Such conduct must, in a country of sense and learning, increase the number of unbelievers already so greatly complained  of; who, if they see matters of opinion not allowe
d to be professed, and impartially debated, think, justly perhaps, that they have foul play, and, therefore, reject many things as false and ill grounded, which otherwise they might perhaps receive as truths.
\par 
\par The grand principle of men considered as having
 relation to the Deity, and under an obligation to be religious, is, that they ought to consult their reason, and seek every where for the best instruction; and of Christians and Protestants the duty, and professed principle is, to consult reason and the 
Scripture, as the rule of their faith and practice.
\par 
\par But how can these, which are practical principles, be duly put in practice, unless all be at liberty, at all times, and in all points, consider and debate with others, (as well as with themselves,) what r
eason and Scripture says; and to profess, and act openly, according to what they are convinced they say?  How can we become better informed with regard to religion, than by using the best means of information? which consist in consulting reason and script
ure, and calling in the aid of others.  And of what use is it to consult reason, and Scripture at all, as any means of information., if we are not, upon conviction, to follow their dictates ?
\par 
\par No man has any reason to apprehend any ill consequences to truth, (for which alone he ought to have any concern,) from free inquiry and debate.\emdash 
  For truth is not a thing to dread examination, but when fairly proposed to an unbiased understanding, is like light to the eye; it must distinguish itself from error, as ligh
t does distinguish does distinguish itself from darkness. For, while free debate is allowed, truth is in no danger, for it will never want a professor thereof, nor an advocate to offer some plea in its behalf. And it can never be wholly banished, but when
 human  decisions, backed by human power, carry all before them.
\par 
\par We ought to examine foundations of opinions, not only, that we may attain the discovery of truth, but we ought to do so, on this account, because that it is our duty ; and the way to recommen
d ourselves to the favour of God. For opinions, how true soever, when the effect of education or tradition, or interest, or passion, can never recommend a man to God. For those ways have no merit in them, and are the worst a man can possibly take to obtai
n truth; and therefore, though they may be objects of forgiveness, they can never be of reward from Him.
\par 
\par Having promised these observations in order to persuade, and dispose the reader to be candid, I will now declare the motives, which induced me to submi
t to the consideration of the intelligent, the contents of this volume.  The Author has spared, he thinks, no pains to arrive at certain Truth in matters of religion; the; sense of which is what distinguishes man from the brute. And in this most  importan
t
  subject that can employ the human understanding, he has been particularly desirous to become acquainted with the Grounds, and Doctrines of the Christian Religion; and nothing but the difficulties, which he in this volume lays before the public, staggers
 his faith in it.  
\par 
\par It may perhaps add to the interest the Reader may take in this work to inform him, that the Author was a believer in the religion of the New Testament, after what he conceived to be a sufficient examination of its evidence for a divine 
origin. He had terminated an examination of the controversy with the Deists to his own satisfaction, i.e. he felt convinced that their objections were not insurmountable, when he turned his attention to the consideration of the ancient, and obscure contro
v
ersy between the Christians and the Jews. His curiosity was deeply interested to examine a subject in truth so little known, and to ascertain the causes, and the reasons, which had prevented a people more interested in the truth of Christianity than any o
t
her from believing it: and he set down to the subject without any suspicion, that the examination would not terminate in convincing him still more in favour of what were then his opinions. After a long, thorough, and startling examination of their Books, 
t
ogether with all the answers to them he could obtain from a Library amply furnished in this respect, he was finally very reluctantly compelled to feel persuaded, by proofs he could neither refute, nor evade, that how easily soever Christians might answer 
the Deists, so called, the Jews were clearly too hard for them. Because they set the Old and New Testament in opposition, and reduce Christians to this fatal dilemma.\emdash 
Either the Old Testament contains a Revelation from God; or it does sot. If it does, then 
the New Testament cannot be from God, because it is palpably, and importantly repugnant to the Old Testament in doctrine, and some other things. Now Jews, and Christians, each of them admit the Old Testament as containing a divine Revelation; consequently
 the Jews cannot, and Christians ought not to receive and allow any thing as a Revelation from God which flatly contradicts a former by them acknowledged Revelation: because it cannot be supposed that God will contradict himself. On the other hand 
\emdash  if the 
Old Testament be not from God, still the New Testament must go down, because it asserts that the Old Testament is a revelation from God, and builds upon it as a foundation. And if the foundation fails, how can the house, stand?: The Author pledges himself
 
to the Reader, to prove, that they establish this dilemma completely. And he cannot help thinking, that there is reason to believe, that if both sides of this strangely neglected controversy had been made public in times past, and become known, that the c
onsequences would have been long ago fatal at least to the New Testament.
\par 
\par The Author has been earnestly dissuaded from making public the contents of this volume on account of apprehended mischievous consequences. He thought, however, that the age of pious 
frauds ought to be past, and their principle discarded, at least in Protestant countries. Deception and error are always, sooner or later, discovered; and truth in, the long run, both in politics, and religion, will never be ultimately harmful.  If what t
he Book states is true, it ought to be known, if it is erroneous; it can, and will, be refuted. 
\par 
\par The Author therefore makes it public, for these reasons, \emdash  because he thinks, that the matter contained in the book, is true, and important, \emdash  because he wishe
d, and found it necessary to justify himself from contemptible misrepresentations uttered behind his back; and to give to those who know him, good and sufficient reasons for past conduct, of which those to whom he is known, cannot be ignorant; and finally
,
 he thought it right, and proper, and humane, to give to the world a work which contained the reasons for the unbelief of the countrymen of Jesus; who for almost eighteen hundred years have been made the unresisting victims of, as the reader will find, gr
oundless misrepresentation, and the most amazing cruelty; because they refused to believe what it was impossible that they should believe, on account of reasons their persecutors did not know, and refused to be informed of.
\par }\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 If the arguments and statements 
contained in this volume should be found to be correct, he believes that every honest and candid man, after his first surprise that they should not have been made known before, will feel for the victims of a mistake so singular and so ancient as the one w
hich is the subject of the following pages; and will think with the author, that it is time, high time, that the truth should be known, and justice be done to them.}{\cs16\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ 
}{\f0\fs20 Do you know (says Rousseau) of many Christians who have taken the pains to examine, with c
are, what the Jews have to say against them ? If some persons have seen any thing of the kind, it is in the books of Christians, A fine way, truly, to get instructed in the arguments of their adversaries! But what can they do? If any one should dare to pu
blish among us, books, in which be openly favours their opinions, we punish the author, the editor, the bookseller. This policy is convenient, and sure always to be in the right. There is a pleasure in refuting people who dare not open their lips"\emdash 
(Emilius.) In the same work he says that \ldblquote 
he will never be convinced that the Jews have not something strong to say, till they shall be permitted to speak for .themselves without fear, and without restraint." It was this hint of Rousseau which first excited the aut
hor's curiosity with regard to the subject of this book.\emdash E.
\par }}}{\f0 
\par 
\par There is not in existence a more singular instance of the mischievous mistakes arising from taking things for granted which require proof, than the case before the reader. The world has all alo
ng been in total error with regard to the reasons and the motives which have prevented the Hebrew nation from receiving the system of the New Testament. They have been successfully accused of incorrigible blindness and obstinacy; and while volumes upon vo
l
umes have been written against them, and the arguments therein contained, supported and enforced by the power of the Inquisition, and the oppressions of all Christendom, these unfortunate people have not been willingly suffered to offer to the world one w
ord in their own defence.  They have not been allowed, after hearing with patience both arguments, and \ldblquote railing accusations\rdblquote 
 in abundance, to answer in their turn; but have been compelled, through the fear of confiscation, persecution, and death, to leave misapprehensions unexplained, and misrepresentations unrefuted.
\par 
\par Is it then to be wondered at, that mankind have considered their adversaries as in the right, and that deserted by reason, and even their own Scriptures, they were supported in their opinion o
nly by a blind and pertinacious obstinacy, more worthy of wonder than curiosity? Alas! the world did not consider, that nothing was more easy than to confute people whose tongues were frozen by the terror of the Inquisition!! But, thanks to the good sense
 
of this enlightened age, those times are past and gone. There is now one happy country where freedom of speech is allowed, where every harmless religious opinion is protected by law, and where every opinion is listened to that is supported by reason. The 
t
ime, I trust, is now come when the substantial arguments of this oppressed, and, in this respect, certainly calumniated, people, may be produced and their reasons set forth, without the fear of harm, and with, and with the hope of hearing from the intelli
gent and the candid. They, we believe, will be fully convinced, that their adversaries have for so long a time triumphed over them without measure, only because they have been suffered to do so without contradiction.
\par 
\par The reader is assured, that, notwithsta
nding the subject, he will find nothing in this volume but what is considered by the author to be fair and liberal argument; and such no honest man ought to decline looking in the face.  He has endeavoured to discuss the important subject of the book in t
h
e most inoffensive manner; for he has no wish, and claims no right, to wound the feelings of those who differ from him in opinion. There is not, nor ought there to be, a word of reproach in it, against the moral character of Jesus, or the twelve Apostles;
 
and the utmost the author attempts to prove is, that their system was founded, not upon fraud and imposture, but upon a mistake. After the deaths of Christ and his Apostles, it was indeed aided and supported by very bad means; but its first founders, the 
author believes, were guilty of no other crime than that of being mistaken; a very common one indeed.
\par 
\par He hopes, therefore, that such a discussion as the one now laid before the public, will be fairly met, and fairly answered, if answered at all, and that r
ecourse will not be had to dishonest and ungentlemanly misrepresentations, and calling names, in order to prevent people from examining things they have a right to know, and in order to blind and frighten the public, the jury to which he appeals. It is in
f
allibly true, that the knowledge of truth is, and must be beneficial to mankind; and that, in the long run, it never was, and never can be, harmful.  It is equally certain, that God would never give a Revelation so slightly founded as to be endangered by 
a
ny sophistry of man.  If the Christian system be from God, it will certainly stand, no human power can overthrow it; and, therefore, no sincere Christian who believes the New Testament, ought to be afraid to meet half way the objections of any one who off
ers them with fairness, and expresses them in decent language; and no sensible Christian ought to shut his ears against his neighbour, who respectfully asks \ldblquote a reason for the faith that is in him.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par The author has been told, indeed, that, \ldblquote supposing the Christian system to be unfounded, yet that it is reasonable to believe, that the Supreme Being would view any attempts to disturb it, with displeasure, on account of its moral effects.
\rdblquote   But is not this something like absurdity? Can God have made it necessary
, that morals should be founded on delusion, in order that they might be supported? Can the God of TRUTH be displeased to have men convinced that they have been mistaken, or imposed upon, by Revelations pretended to be from Him, which if in fact not from 
h
im, must be the offspring either of error or falsehood? And if the Christian system be, in truth, not from God, can we suppose, that in his eyes its doctrines with regard to Him are atoned for, by a few good moral precepts?  Can we suppose, that that Supr
e
me and awful Being can feel Himself honoured, in having his creatures made to believe, that He was once nine months in the womb of a woman; that God, the Great and Holy, went through all the nastiness of infancy; that be lived a mendicant in a corner of t
h
e earth, and was finally scourged, and hanged on a gibbet by his own creatures;?  If these things be, in truth, all mistakes, can we suppose, that God is pleased in having them believed of Him? On the contrary, can they, together with the doctrine of the 
Trinity, I would respectfully ask, be possibly looked upon by Him (if they are not true), otherwise, than as so many \emdash \emdash 
 what I forbear to mention. But this is not all. The reader is requested to consider, that the Christian system is built upon the prostrat
e necks of the whole Hebrew nation. It is a tree which flourished in a soil watered by their tears; its leaves grew green in an atmosphere filled with their cries and groans; and its roots have been moistened and fattened with their blood. The ruin, repro
a
ch, and sufferings of that people, are considered, by its advocates, as the most striking proof of the Divine authority of the New Testament; and for almost eighteen hundred years the system contained in that book has been the cause of miseries and afflic
tions to that nation, the most horrible and unparalleled in the history of man.
\par }\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 Now, if that system be indeed Divine, all this may be very well, and as it should be. But if, perchance, it should turn out to be a mistake if it be, in truth, not from God; wi
ll not, then, that system be justly chargeable with all those shocking cruelties which, on account of it, have been inflicted on that people?
\par 
\par If that sy
stem be verily and indeed founded on a mistake, no language, no indignation, can do justice to its guilt in this respect. All its good moral effects are a mere drop of pure water in that ocean of Jewish and Gentile blood it has caused to be shed by embitt
e
ring men's minds with groundless prejudices. And if it be not divine; if it be plainly and demonstrably proved to have originated in error; who is the man, that, after considering what has been suggested, will have the heart to come forward, and coolly sa
y, \ldblquote 
that it is better that a whole nation of men should continue, as heretofore, to be unjustly hated, reproached, cursed, and plundered, and massacred, on account of it, rather than that the received religious system should be demonstrated to be founded on
 mistake?" No! If it be, in fact, founded on mistake, every man of honour, honesty, and humanity, will say, without hesitation, "Let the delusion (if it is one) be done away, which must be supported at the expense of truth, of justice, and the happiness a
nd respectability of a whole nation, who are men like ourselves, and more unfortunate than any others, in having already suffered but too much affliction and misery on account of it.\rdblquote 
  No!  though the moral effects ascribed to this system of religion were a
s good, as great, and ten times greater than they ever have been, or can be, yet, if it is a delusion, it would be absolutely wicked to support it, since it is erected upon the sufferings, wretchedness, and oppression of a people who compose millions of t
he great family of mankind.
\par 
\par It is remarkable, that the ablest modern advocates for the truth and divine authority of the gospel, as if they knew of no certain, demonstrative proof which could be adduced in a case of so much importance, seem to content them
selves, and expect their readers should be satisfied, with an accumulation of probable arguments in its favour; and it has been even said, that the case admits of no other kind of proof. If it be so, the author requests all so persuaded to consider, for a
 
moment, whether it could be reconciled to any ideas of wisdom in an earthly potentate, if he should send an ambassador to a foreign state to mediate a negotiation of the greatest importance, without furnishing him with certain, indubitable credentials of 
t
he truth and authenticity of his mission? And to consider further, whether it be just or seemly, to attribute to the Omniscient, Omnipotent Deity, a degree of weakness and folly, which was never yet imputed to any of his creatures ? for unless men are har
d
y enough to pass so gross an affront upon the tremendous Majesty of Heaven, the improbability that God should delegate the Mediator of a most important covenant to be proposed to all mankind, without enabling him to give them clear and, in reason, indispu
table proof of the divine authority of his mission, must ever infinitely outweigh the aggregate sum of all the probabilities which can be accumulated in the
\par opposite scale of the balance. And to conclude, I presume it will not be denied, that the authentici
ty and celestial origin of any thing pretending to be a Divine Revelation, before it has any claims upon our faith, ought to be made clear beyond all reasonable doubt; otherwise, it can have no just claims to a right to influence our conduct.
\par 
\par And as for t
he opinions and the arguments contained in this volume, I have but trembling hopes that they will meet with favour, merely because the author is sincere, and wishes to do right.  Conscious that I make a perilous attempt, in daring to defend myself by atta
c
king ancient error supported by multitudes, with no other seconds besides Truth and Reason, it would be bootless for me to ask indulgence for them on account of my good intentions; and as they can derive no credit from the authority of the writer, I am se
nsible they must fall by their own weakness, or stand by their own strength. I must leave them, therefore, to their fate; and I can cheerfully do it, without fear for the issue, if the reader will only be candid, and will comply with my earnest request 
\emdash  \ldblquote first to understand, and then judge.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Before I conclude these prefatory remarks, I would observe, that as the contents of this volume will be perfectly novel to nine hundred and ninety-nine out of a thousand, it is but justice to the public, and to myself,
 to avow, that I do not claim to have originated all the arguments advanced in this book.  A very considerable proportion of them were selected, and derived, from ancient and curious Jewish Tracts, translated from Chaldee into Latin, very little known eve
n
 in Europe, and not at all known there to any but the curious and inquisitive. And I reasonably hope, that discerning men will be much more disposed to weigh with candour the arguments herein offered, when they consider that they are, in many instances, t
h
e reasonings of learned, ancient and venerable men, who, in times when the inquisition was in vigour, suffered under the most bloody oppression, and whose writings were cautiously preserved, and secretly handed down to the seventeenth century in manuscrip
t, as the printing of them would assuredly have brought all concerned to the stake. Some few other arguments were derived from other authors, and were taken from works not so much known as I hope they will be.
\par 
\par Finally, I commit my work to the discretion of
 the good sense of the reader, believing that if he is not convinced, he will at least be interested; and hoping that he will discover from the complexion of the book (what my own heart bears witness to) that the author is a sincere inquirer after truth, 
and perfectly willing to be convinced that he is in error by any one who can remove the difficulties, and refute the arguments, now laid by him before the public, with deference and respect.
\par 
\par September  28, 1813.
\par }{\f0\fs16 
\par }\pard \qc\widctlpar\adjustright {\f0\fs16 \page }{\f0\fs28 THE
\par 
\par EVIDENCES OF CHRISTIANITY
\par 
\par Examined by Comparing the
\par 
\par NEW TESTAMENT WITH THE OLD.
\par }\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {\f0\fs28 
\par CHAPTER I.
\par }{\f0\fs18 
\par }{\f0 Introductory, -- showing that the Apostles and the authors of the New Testament, endeavour to prove Christianity from the Old.
\par 
\par Christianity is founded on Judaism, and the New Testament upon the Old
; and Jesus of Nazareth is the person said in the New Testament to be Promised in the Old, under the character and name of the Messiah of the Jews, and who as such only claims the obedience, and submission of the World.  Accordingly, it is the design of t
h
e authors of the New, to prove Christianity from the Old, Testament; which is said Jo. 5:39, to contain the words of eternal life: and it represents Jesus and his Apostles, as fulfilling by their mission, doctrines and works, the predictions of the Prophe
ts and the Law: which last is said to prophecy of, or to typify Christianity.
\par 
\par Matthew, for example, proves several parts of Christianity from the Old Testament, either by asserting them to be things foretold therein as to come to pass under the gospel dispensation; or to be founded on the notions of the Old Testament.
\par 
\par Thus he proves Mary\rquote s being with child by the Holy Spirit, and the Angel\rquote s telling  her she \ldblquote shall  bring forth a son, and call his name Jesus;\rdblquote  and the other circumstances attending his miraculous birth; Jesus\rquote 
 birth at Bethlehem; his flight into Egypt; the slaughter of the infants; Jesus Dwelling at Nazareth, and at Capernaum, in the borders of Zabulon, and Naphtali; his casting out devils, and healing the sick; his eating with Publicans and
 sinners; his speaking in parables that the Jews might not understand him; his sending his disciples to fetch an ass, and a colt; the children\rquote s crying in the Temple; the resurrection of Jesus from the dead; Jesus\rquote 
 being betrayed by Judas, and Judas\rquote  returning back the thirty pieces of Silver, and the Priest\rquote s buying the Potter\rquote 
s Field with them; and his hanging Himself; &c. &c.  All these events, and many more, are said to be fulfillments of the Prophecies of the Old Testament, see Mat. 1, 2: and 4 chapters, and ch. 8: v. 16,17, and ch. 9: 11,13, and ch. 13: 13, ch. 21: 2
\emdash 7. 15,16, ch. 22: 31, 32, ch. 26 : 54, 56, ch. 27: 5 \emdash  10.
\par 
\par Jesus himself is represented as proving the truth of Christianity thus.  He, joining himself to two of his Disciples, (Luke 28: 15\emdash 
22,) after his resurrection, who knew him not, and complaining of their mistake about his person, whom they now took not to be the Messiah, because he had been condemned to death, and crucified; he, observing their disbelief of his resurrection, which h
ad been reported to them by \ldblquote }{\i\f0 certain women}{\f0  of their acquaintance,\rdblquote  upon the credit of the affirmation of angels, said unto them, \ldblquote 
 O Fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken.  Ought not Christ (i.e. the Messiah) to have suffere
d these things, and to enter into his Glory? and beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Again he discoursed to all his Disciples, putting them in mind, that, before his Death, he told them (Luke 24: 44, 46, 47,) that \ldblquote 
all things must be fulfilled which were written in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning him;\rdblquote  adding, \ldblquote thus it is written, and thus it behoveth Christ (1. e. the Messiah) to suffer, 
and to rise from the dead the third day; and that repentance, and remission of sins should be preached in his name, beginning at Jerusalem.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par When the people of several nations, Acts 2:12, were amazed at the Apostles speaking in their several tongues, and 
when many mocked the Apostles, saying they were full of new wine, Peter makes a speech in public, wherein, after saying they were not drunk, because it was but the third hour of the day, he endeavours to show them, that this was spoken of by the Prophet J
oel, and he concludes with proving the resurrection of Jesus from the book of Psalms.
\par 
\par Peter, and John, tell the people assembled at the Temple, \ldblquote  that God had showed }{\i\f0 by the mouth of all his Prophets,}{\f0  that Christ should suffer,\rdblquote  Acts 3:18.
\par 
\par Peter to justify his preaching to the Gentiles, concludes his discourse with saying, Acts 10: 43 \emdash \ldblquote To Jesus gave }{\i\f0 all the Prophets witness,}{\f0 
 that through his name whosoever (i.e. Jew, or Gentile) believeth in him, shall receive  remission of sins.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Paul also endeavours to prove to the Jews in the Synagogue of Antioch, (Ib. v. 13) that the history of Jesus was contained in the Old Testament, and that he, and Barnabas were commanded in the Old Testament, to preach the gospel to the Gentiles.
\par 
\par On the occasion of a dispute among the Christians whether the Gentile converts were to be circumcised after the Law of Moses, and to observe the Law, we find, that after much disputing, the point was settled by James by quotation from Amos.
\par 
\par The Bereans are highly extolled (Acts 17 : }{\i\f0 11,) for searching the Scriptures, }{\f0 i}{\i\f0 .}{\f0 e. the Old Testament, }{\i\f0 daily,}{\f0  in order to find out whether the things preached to them by the Apostles }{\i\f0 were so, or no :}{\f0 
 who if they had not proved }{\i\f0 these things,}{\f0  i.e. Christianity from the Old Testament, ought, according to their own principles, to have been rejected by the Bereans, as teachers of false doctrine.
\par 
\par Paul, when accused before Agrippa by the Jews, said (Acts 26; 6,) \ldblquote I stand, and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers,\rdblquote  i.e. for teachin
g Christianity, or the true doctrine of the Old Testament, and to this accusation he pleads guilty, by declaring in the fullest manner, that he taught }{\i\f0 nothing}{\f0  but the Doctrines of the Old Testament. \ldblquote 
 Having therefore (says he) obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small, and great, saying }{\i\f0 now other things than those which the Prophets, and Moses did say should come,}{\f0  that the Christ should suffer, and that }{
\i\f0 he should be the first who should rise from the Dead,}{\f0  and should show light unto the People, and unto the Gentiles.\rdblquote   
\par 
\par The Author of the first Epistle to the Cor. says, 15 ch. v. 4, that \ldblquote Jesus rose again from the dead the third day, according to the Scriptures,\rdblquote  that is, according to the Old Testament, and he is supposed to g
round this on the history of the prophet Jonas, who was three days and three nights in the fish's belly: though the cases do not seem to be parallel, for Jesus being buried on Friday evening, and rising on Sunday morning, was in the tomb but }{\i\f0 
one day}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 two nights.
\par 
\par }{\f0 But most singular is the argument of the Apostle Paul (in his Epistle to the Galatians) to prove Christianity from the Old Testament. \ldblquote 
Tell me (says he, Gal. 4: 21,) ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law ? For it is written,
 that Abraham had two Sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a free woman.  But he who was of the bond woman, was born after the flesh; but he who was of the free woman was by promise. Which things are }{\i\f0 an Allegory.}{\f0 
 For these are the two covenants, the }{\i\f0 one from }{\f0 
Mount Sinai which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar.  But this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her Children.  But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the Mother of us all. For i
t is written (Isaiah 54: 1,) \ldblquote  Rejoice thou Barren that bearest not, break forth, and cry thou that travailest not, for the desolate hath many more children than she which hath an husband.\rdblquote 
 Now, we Brethren, as Isaac was, are children of the Promise. But a
s then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the spirit, even so it is now. But what saith the Scripture (Gen. 21: 10, 12,) Cast out the bond woman, and her son, for the son of the bond woman shall not be heir with the son of
 the free woman. So then, Brethren, we are not the children of the bond woman, but of the free. Stand fast, therefore, in the Liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par In fine, the Author of these Epistles reasons in the same singular manner from the Old Testament throughout; which is, according to him, (2 Tim. iii: 15,) \ldblquote able to make men wise unto Salvation :\rdblquote 
 asserting himself and others to be ministers of the New Testament, as being ministers, not of \ldblquote the letter but of \ldblquote the Spirit,\rdblquote  (2Cor. iii: 6.) That is. Of the Old Testament, spiritually }{\i\f0 understood;}{\f0 
 and endeavouring to prove, especially in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that Christianity was veiled and contained in the Old Testament, and was }{\i\f0 implied}{\f0  in the Jewish history, and Law, both which he considers as }{\i\f0 types}{\f0  and }{
\i\f0 shadows}{\f0  of Christianity.
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs28 CHAPTER II.
\par }{\f0 
\par STATEMENT of THE QUESTION IN DISPUTE.
\par 
\par How Christianity depends on the Old Testament, or what proofs are to be met with therein in behalf of Christi
anity, are the subjects of almost all the numerous books written by divines, and other apologists for Christianity, but the chief and principal of these proofs may be justly supposed to be urged in the New Testament itself, by the authors thereof; who rel
ate the history of the first preaching of the Gospel, and profess themselves to be apostles of Jesus, or companions of the Apostles.
\par 
\par Some of these proofs, as a specimen, have been already adduced. And if they are valid proofs, then is Christianity strongly and invincibly established: on its true foundations.  
\par 
\par It is established upon its true foundations, because Jesus and his Apostles did, as we have seen, ground Christianity on those proofs; and it is strongly and invincibly established on those foundations, because a proof drawn from an }{\i\f0 inspired}{\f0 
 book is perfectly conclusive.  And prophecies delivered in an inspired book are, when fulfilled, such as may be justly deemed sure, and demonstrative proof; and which Peter (2 Peter 1: 19) prefers as an }{\i\f0 argument for the truth of Christianity,}{
\f0  to that miraculous attestation (whereof he, and two other Apostles are said to have been witnesses,) given by God himself to the mission of Jesus of Nazareth.  His argument appears to be as follows. \ldblquote Laying this foundation, th
at Prophecy proceeds from the Holy Spirit, it is a stronger argument than a miracle, which depends upon eternal evidence, and testimony.\rdblquote   And this opinion of Peter\rquote 
s is corroborated by the words of Jesus himself, who, in Mat. xxiv: 23, 24, Mark xiii: 21, 22, affirms, that miracles wrought in confirmation of a pretender\rquote s being the Messiah, are not to be considered as proof of his being so \emdash  \ldblquote 
though they show great signs and wonders, believe it not,\rdblquote  is his command to his disciples.
\par 
\par Besides, prophecies ful
filled, seem the most proper of all arguments to evince the truth of a new revelation which is designed to be universally promulgated to men. For a man who has the Old Testament put into his hands, which contain prophecies, and the New Testament afterward
,
 which is said to contain their completions, and is once satisfied, as he may be with the greatest ease, that the Old Testament existed before the New, may have a complete, internal, divine, demonstration of the truth of Christianity, without long, and la
b
orious enquiries.  Whereas, arguments of another nature, such, for instance, as relate to the authority and genuineness of the books, and the persons, and characters of authors, and witnesses, require more application, and understanding, than falls to the
 
share of the bulk of mankind; or else are very precarious in themselves, since we know that in the first centuries there were numberless forged Gospels, and Apocryphal writings imposed upon the credulous as apostolic and authentic; and there were in the A
postles times, as many, and as great heresies and schisms as perhaps have been since in any age of the Church. So that, setting aside the before mentioned internal proofs from }{\i\f0 prophecy,}{\f0 
 (which were the Apostle's proofs and in their nature sufficient of themselves) we should have no }{\i\f0 certain proof at}{\f0  all for the Religion of the New Testament. 
\par 
\par On the other hand, if the proofs for Christianity from the Old Testament, are }{\i\f0 not valid,}{\f0  if the arguments founded on that Book be }{\i\f0 not }{\f0 conclusive, and the Prophecies cited from thence be }{\i\f0 not fulfilled,}{\f0 
 then has Christianity }{\i\f0 no just foundation;}{\f0  for the foundation on which Jesus and his Apostles built it is then }{\i\f0 invalid, and false.}{\f0  Nor can miracles, said to have been wrought by Jesus, and his Apostles in behalf of Christian
ity, avail anything in the case. For miracles can never render a foundation valid, which is in itself invalid; can never make a false inference true; can never make a prophecy fulfilled, which is not fulfilled; and can never designate a Messiah, or Jesus 
for the Messiah, if both are not marked out in the Old Testament; no more than they could prove the earth to be the sun, or a}{\i\f0  }{\f0 mouse a lion.
\par 
\par Besides, miracles said to have been wrought, may be often justly decided false reports, when attributed to persons w
ho claim an authority from the Old Testament, which they impertinently alledge to support their pretentions.  God can never be supposed often to permit miracles to be done for the confirmation of a false, or pretended mission. And if at any time he does p
ermit miracles to be done in confirmation of a pretended mission, we have express directions from the Old Testament (acknowledged by Christians to be of divine authority) Deut. xiii. 1, 2, }{\i\f0 not to regard}{\f0 
 such miracles; but to continue firm to the antecedent revelation given by }{\i\f0 Himself,}{\f0  and contained in the Old Testament, notwithstanding any \ldblquote signs or wonders;\rdblquote 
 which, under the circumstance of attesting something contrary to an antecedent revelation, we are forewarned of as being }{\i\f0 no test of truth.}{\f0  No new revel
ation, however supported by miracles, ought ever to be received as coming from God, unless it confirms, or at least does not contradict, the preceding standing revelation, acknowledged to be from God.
\par 
\par Accordingly, we find from the New Testament, that all the recorded miracles of Jesus could not make the Jews believe him to be the Messiah when they thought that he did not }{\i\f0 answer the description}{\f0 
 of that character given by the Prophets; on the contrary, they procured him to be crucified for pretending to be what to them he appeared plainly not to be.
\par 
\par Nor had his miracles alone any effect on his own brethren, and kindred, who seem (Mark vi. 4; Jo. vii. 6,) to have been more incredulous in him than other Jews. Nor had they the effect, they are supposed to have 
been fitted to produce, among his immediate followers, and Disciples; some of whom did not believe in him, but deserted him, and particularly had }{\i\f0 no faith }{\f0 
in him when he spake of his sufferings; and thought that he could not be their Messiah when they saw 
him suffer, notwithstanding his miracles, and his declaration to them that he was the Messiah. And so rooted were the Jews in the notion of the Messiah's being a temporal Prince, a conquering Pacificator, and Deliverer, even after the death of Jesus, and 
t
he progress of Christianity grounded on the belief of his being the Messiah, that they have in all times of distress, particularly in the apostolic sera, in great numbers followed impostors giving themselves out as the Messiah, with force, and arms, as th
e
 way to restore the kingdom of Israel. So that the Jews, who it seems mistook in this most important matter, and after the most egregious manner, the meaning of their own Books, might, till they were set right in their interpretation of the Old Testament,
 
and were convinced from thence that Jesus was the Messiah, might I say, as justly reject Jesus asserting his mission, and Doctrines with miracles, as they might reject any other person, who in virtue of miracles would lead them into idolatry, or any other
 breach of their law.
\par 
\par In fine, the miracles said to have been wrought by Jesus, are, according to the Old Testament, the gospel scheme, and the words of Jesus himself, no absolute proof of his being the Messiah, or of the truth of Christianity; and Jesus l
aid no great stress upon them as proving doctrines, for he forewarned his disciples, that \ldblquote signs and wonders\rdblquote  would be performed, so great and stupendous, as to deceive, if possible, the very elect, and bids them }{\i\f0 
not to give any heed to them.}{\cs16\i\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\fs20\super *}{\fs20  There are a
 great many persons who conceive that Christianity is sufficiently proved to be true, if the miracles of Jesus are true, even without any regard to the prophecies, so often appealed to by him. But supposing the miracles to be true; yet no miracles can pro
v
e that which is false in itself to be true. If therefore Jesus be not foretold as the Messiah in the Old Testament, no miracles can prove Jesus to be the Messiah foretold. Nay, it would be a stronger argument to prove Jesus to be a false pretender, that h
e appealed to prophecies as relating to him, when in fact they had no relation whatever to him; and by that means imposed upon the ignorant people; than it would be that he came from God, merely because he worked miracles; for \ldblquote 
False Christs and false prophets may arise, and may show such great signs and wonders as to deceive, if it were possible, the very elect.\rdblquote  Matt. xxiv. 24. Yet no Christian }{\f0\fs20 
would allow it to be argued from thence, that those false Christs were true ones: nor would any one conclude; tha
t a man came from God, (notwithstanding any miracle he might do) if he appealed to Scripture for that which is no where in it. In fine, if miracles would prove the Messiahship of Jesus, so also they would prove the Messiahship of the false Christs, and fa
l
se prophets spoken of above. Nay more, they would demonstrate the Divine mission of Antichrist himself; who, according to the epistle to the Thessalonians, (2 Thes. ch. ii. 8, 9,10) and the Revelations, ch. xiii. 13, 14, was to perform "great signs and wo
nders," equal to any wrought by Jesus, for the same Greek words are used to express the wonderful works or  \ldblquote great signs and wonders\rdblquote  of Antichrist, which are elsewhere used to express the miracles, or \ldblquote 
 great signs and wonders\rdblquote  of Jesus himself.
\par }{\f0\fs20\cf1 
\par }{\f0\fs20 It is a striking circumstance, that the earliest apologists for Christianity laid little stress upon the miracles of its founder.
\par 
\par Justin Martyr, in his Apology, is very shy of appealing to the miracles of Jesus in confirmation of his pretentions; he lays no stress
 upon them, but relies entirely upon the prophecies he quotes as in his favor. Jerome, in his comment on the eighty-first Psalm, assures us, \ldblquote 
that the performance of miracles was no extraordinary thing: and that it was no more than what Appollonius, and Apulias, and innumerable impostors had done before.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Lactantius saw so little force in the miracles of Christ, exclusive of the prophecies, that he does not hesitate to affirm their utter inability to support the Christian religion by }{\i\f0\fs20 themselves.}{\f0\fs20  [Lactan. Div. Inst. L. v. c. 3.]

\par 
\par Celsus, observing upon the words of Jesus, that \ldblquote false prophets and false Christs shall arise, and show grant signs and wonders," sneeringly observes, " A fine thing truly! that miracles done by him should prove him to be a God, and
 when done by others should demonstrate them to be false prophets and impostors.\rdblquote  
\par 
\par Tertullian, on the words of Jesus, here referred to by Celsus, says as follows;
\par 
\par \ldblquote Christ, foretelling that many imposters should come and perform many wonders, shews, that our faith cannot }{\i\f0\fs20 without great temerity}{\f0\fs20  be founded on miracles, since they were so early wrought, by false Christians themselves.
\rdblquote  [Tertul. in Marc. L. ii. c. 3.]
\par 
\par Indeed, miracles in the two first centuries were allowed very litt
le weight in proving doctrines. Since the Christians did not deny, that the heathens performed miracles in behalf of their gods, and that the heretics performed them as will as the orthodox. This accounts for the perfect indifference of the heathens to th
e miracles said to have been performed by the founders of Christianity. Hierocles speaks with great contempt of what he calls " the little tricks of Jesus," And Origen, in his reply to Celsus, waves the consideration of the Christian miracles:  
\ldblquote for (says he) the very mention of these things sets you heathens upon the. broad grin.\rdblquote 
  Indeed, that they laughed very heartily at what in the eighteenth century is read with a grave face, is evident from the few fragments of their works written against Christianity which has escaped the }{\i\f0\fs20 burning zeal}{\f0\fs20 
 of the fathers, and the Christian emperors; who piously sought for, and burned up, these mischievous volumes to prevent their doing mischief to posterity. This conduct of theirs is very suspicious. Why burn writing they 
could so triumphantly refute, if they were refutable? They should have remembered the just reflection of Arnobius, their own apologist, against the heathens, who were for abolishing at once such writings as promoted Christianity.\emdash 
"Intercipere scripta et publicatam velle submergere lectionem, non est Deos defendere, sed }{\i\f0\fs20 veritatis testificationem  timere."}{\f0\fs20  [Arnob. contra Gentes. Liber ni.]\emdash E.
\par }\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {
\par }}}{\i\f0 
\par }{\f0 
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs18 
\par }{\f0\fs22 
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs28 CHAPTER III.
\par }{\f0 
\par THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MESSIAH, AS GIVEN BY THE HEBREW PROPHETS.
\par 
\par Having shewn from the New 
Testament, and proved from the nature of the case, that the whole credit and authority of the Christian religion, rests and depends upon Jesus' being the Messiah of the Jews; and, having stated the principles which ought to govern the decision of this que
stion, and}{\i\f0  }{\f0 established the fact, that the pretensions of any claiming to be considered as}{\f0\fs16  }{\f0 this Messiah, must be tested }{\i\f0 solely}{\f0  by the }{\i\f0 coincidence}{\f0 
 of the character, and circumstances of the pretender with the descriptions given by the prophets as the means by which he may be known to be so\emdash 
it is proper, in order that we may be enabled to form a correct opinion, to lay before the reader those passages of the Old Testament which contain the promise of the appearing, and express the characteristics of this \ldblquote hope of Israel,\rdblquote 
 this beneficent saviour, and august monarch, in whose time a suffering world, was, according to the Hebrew prophets, to become the abode of happy beings.
\par 
\par Leaving out for the present the consideration of }{\i\f0 the Shiloh}{\f0  mentioned in Gen. xlix., the first prophecy we meet with, supposed to relate to this great character, is contained in Num. xxiv. 17,19, \ldblquote 
There shall come a star out of Jacob, and a sceptre shall rise out of Israel, shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy the children of Seth.\rdblquote  Geddes interprets the latter clause\emdash  \ldblquote shall destroy the sons of esdition;
\rdblquote  but it probably means, according to the common interpretation, that this monarch was to govern the whole race of men, i. e. the children of }{\i\f0 Seth;}{\f0  for Noah, according to the Old Testam
ent, was descended from him; and of the posterity of Noah, was the whole earth overspread. And in verse 19, it is added  \ldblquote out of Jacob shall come he that shall have }{\i\f0 dominion.\rdblquote }{\cs16\i\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain 
\s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20 Before going into the consideration of the following prophecies, the author would warn the reader }{\i\f0\fs20 to bear in mind,}{\f0\fs20  that whether these prophecies }{\i\f0\fs20 
ever will be }{\f0\fs20 fulfilled, is a question of }{\i\f0\fs20 no import in the world}{\f0\fs20  to the question under consideration, which is\emdash whether they }{\i\f0\fs20 have been}{\f0\fs20  fulfilled eighteen hundred years ago, in the person of }
{\i\f0\fs20 Jesus Christ,}{\f0\fs20 
 who is asserted by Christians to be the person foretold in these prophecies, and to have fulfilled their predictions. This question can be easily decided, and only, we think, by appealing to past history, and to the scenes passing around us, a
nd comparing them with these predictions.\emdash E.
\par }{\f0\fs20\cf1 
\par }}}{\i\f0 
\par }{\f0 
\par God says to David, 2 Sam. vii. 12,  \ldblquote And when thy days shall be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels; and I will establis
h his kingdom. He shall build a house for my name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom for ever. I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son \emdash 
 if he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children o
f men. But my mercy shall not depart from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee. And thy house, and thy kingdom shall be established before me, and thy throne shall be established for ever.\rdblquote 
 Mention is made of this promise in several of 
the Psalms, but it certainly suggests no idea of such a person as Jesus of Nazareth, but only that of a temporal prince of the posterity of David. It implies, that his family would never entirely fail for though it might be severely punished, it would rec
o
ver its lustre again. And connecting this promise with that of the glory of the nation in general, foretold in the books of Moses, it might be inferred by the Hebrews, who believed them to be of Divine authority, that after long and great calamities (the 
consequences of their sins,) the people of Israel would be restored to their country, and attain the most distinguished felicity under a}{\i\f0  }{\f0 
prince of the family of David. This is the subject of numberless prophecies throughout the Old Testament.
\par 
\par Passing over all those prophecies in which }{\i\f0 the national glory is}{\f0  spoken of }{\i\f0 without}{\f0  any mention of }{\i\f0 a prince}{\f0  or }{\i\f0 head;}{\f0 
 I shall recite, and remark upon the most eminent of those in which mention is made of any }{\i\f0 particular person, }{\f0 under whom, or by means of whom, the Israelitish nation, it is said, would enjoy the transcendent prosperity elsewhere foretold.

\par 
\par The second Psalm is no doubt well known to my readers, and supposing it to refer to the Messiah, it is evident, that it describes him enthroned upon mount Zion, the favorite of God, and the resistless conqueror }{\i\f0 of}{\f0  his enemies.
\par 
\par The next prophecy of this distinguished individual is recorded in Isaiah ix. 6 \emdash  \ldblquote 
Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and the Wonderful, the Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father }{\i\f0 shall call his name}{\cs16\i\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain 
\s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20\cf1 The word in }{\f0\fs20 the original being }{\i\f0\fs20 Vayikra,}{\f0\fs20  in the Kal or Active form of the verb, and not }{\i\f0\fs20 Vayikare}{\f0\fs20  the Niphal or Passive form.
\emdash D.}{\f0\fs20\cf11 
\par 
\par }}}{\f0  the Prince of Peace.\rdblquote  [For thus it is pointed to be read in the original Hebrew, and this is the meaning of the passage, and not as in the absurd translation of this verse in the English version.] \ldblquote 
 Of the increase of his government there shall be no end upon the throne of David, and his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment, and with justice from henceforth and for ever: the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will do this.\rdblquote 
 Here again we have a mighty monarch, sitting upon }{\i\f0 the throne of David,}{\f0  upon }{\i\f0 earth;}{\f0  and not a }{\i\f0 spiritual}{\f0  king placed }{\i\f0 in heaven,}{\f0  upon the throne of \ldblquote the mighty God, the everlasting Father.
\rdblquote 
\par 
\par The next passage which comes under notice, is in the eleventh chapter of Isa
iah, in which a person is mentioned, under whom Israel, and the whole earth was to enjoy great prosperity and felicity. He is described as an upright prince, endued with the spirit of God, under whose reign there would be }{\i\f0 universal peace,}{\f0 
 which was to take place after the return of the Israelites from their dispersed state, when the whole nation would be united and happy.
\par 
\par \ldblquote There shall spring forth a rod from the trunk of Jesse, and a scion from his roots shall become fruitful. And the spirit of the Lord sh
all rest upon him; the spirit of wisdom, and understanding; the spirit of counsel, and strength; the spirit of knowledge, and the fear of the Lord. And he shall be quick of discernment in the fear of the Lord; so that not according to the sight of his eye
s shall he judge, nor according to the hearing of the ears shall he reprove. With righteousness shall he judge the poor, and with equity shall he work conviction}{\cs16\f0\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super #}{
 }{\f0\fs20 reprove or argue.\emdash D.
\par }{\f0\fs20\cf11 
\par }}}{\f0  on the meek of the earth. And he shall smite the earth with the blast
 of his mouth; and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked one. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his lions, and faithfulness the cincture of his reins. Then shall the wolf take up his abode with the lamb ; and the leopard shall lie do
w
n with the kid; and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling shall come together, and a little child shall lead them. And the heifer, and the she bear shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.  And the suckling shall play upon th
e
 hole of the asp; and upon the den of the basilisk shall the new weaned child lay his hand. They shall not hurt, nor destroy in my holy mountain, for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. And it shall come to pa
ss in that day, the root of Jesse which standeth for an ensign to the people, unto him shall the nations repair, and}{\i\f0  }{\f0 his resting place shall be glorious.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par As the scion here spoken of is said to spring from }{\i\f0 the root}{\f0  of Jesse, it looks as if it were intended to intimate, that the }{\i\f0 tree itself}{\f0   would be }{\i\f0 cut down, }{\f0 or that the power of David's Family would be for }{\i\f0 
some time extinct;}{\f0  but that it would revive in \ldblquote the latter days.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par The same Prince is again mentioned, chap xxxiii. 1, 3, where the people are described to be both virtuous, and flourishing, and to continue to be so. (v. 15\emdash 17.)
\par }\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 \ldblquote Behold a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule with equity. And the man shall be a covert from the storm, as a refuge from the flood, as canals of waters in 
a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a land of fainting with heat. And him the eyes of those that see shall regard, and the ears of them that hear shall harken, * * * * till the spirit from on high be poured out upon us, and the wilderness become
 a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be esteemed a forest. And judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and in the fruitful field shall reside righteousness. And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness }{\i\f0 
perpetual quiet,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 security.}{\f0  And my people shall dwell in a peaceful mansion, and in habitations secure, and in resting places undisturbed.\rdblquote   
\par 
\par The same Prophet, chap. lxii 1, speaks of a person under the title of \ldblquote }{\i\f0 God\rquote s Servant,\rdblquote }{\f0  of a meek disposition, raised up by God 
to enlighten the world, even the Gentile part of it; to bring prisoners out of their confinement, and to open their eyes; alluding, probably, to the custom too common in the East; of sealing up the eyes, by sewing or fastening together the eyelids of pers
ons, and then imprisoning thorn for }{\i\f0 life. It is doubted, }{\f0 however, whether the Prophet meant, or had in view, in this passage, the }{\i\f0 Messiah,}{\f0  or }{\i\f0 his own nation.
\par 
\par }{\f0 \ldblquote Behold my servant whom I will uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth; I will make my spiri
t rest upon him, and he shall publish judgment to the nations. He shall not cry aloud, nor raise a clamour, nor cause his voice to be heard in the public places. The bruised reed shall he not break, and the dimly burning flax he shall not quench, he shall
 publish judgment so as to establish it perfectly. His force shall not be abated, nor broken, until he has firmly seated judgment in the earth, and the distant nations shall earnestly wait for his Law.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote Thus saith the Lord, even, the Eternal, who created 
the heavens, and stretched them out; who spread abroad the earth, and the produce thereof, who giveth breath to the people upon it, and spirit to them that tread thereon. I the Lord have called thee for a righteous purpose,}{\cs16\f0\super *{\footnote 
\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20 Or, in righteousness.\emdash D.}{\f0\fs20\cf11 
\par }{
\par }}}{\f0  an
d I will take hold of thy hand, and I will preserve thee; and I will give thee for a covenant to the people, for a light to the nations; to open the eyes of the blind, to bring the captive out of confinement, and from the dungeon those that dwell in darkn
e
ss. I am the Eternal, that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another, nor my praise to the graven images. The former predictions, lo! they are to come .to pass, and now events I now declare; before they spring forth, behold I make them known unt
o you.\rdblquote  See also chap. xlix. 1,12, and chap. liv. 3, 5.
\par 
\par In the 3d chapter of Hosea, verses 4 and 5, it is said by the Prophet, that \ldblquote the sons of Israel shall abide many days without a king, and without a prince, and without sacrifice, and without a statue,
 and without an ephod, and without Teraphim. Afterward shall the sons of Israel return, and shall seek the Lord their God, and DAVID their King, and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in the latter days.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Micah chap. v. speaks of the Messiah thus, \ldblquote 
And thou Bethlehem Ephratah, art thou too little to be among the leaders of Judah ? Out of thee shall come forth unto me, him who is to be ruler in Israel; and his goings forth have been from old, from the days of hidden ages. Therefore will He (God) deli
ver them up, }{\i\f0 until}{\f0 
 the time when she that bringeth forth, hath brought forth, and until the residue of his brethren shall return together with the sons of Israel. And. he shall stand and feed his flock, in the strength of the Lord, in the majesty of the nam
e of the Lord his God, and they shall abide, for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth, and he shall be Peace.\rdblquote  Jeremiah also speaks of the restoration of the Israelites under a Prince of the family of David, chap. xxiii. 5, 8.
\par 
\par \ldblquote Behold the days are coming, saith the Lord, that I will raise up unto David a righteous branch, and a king shall reign, and act wisely, and shall execute justice, and judgment in the earth.  }{\i\f0 In his days}{\f0 
 Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell in security, and this is the name by which the Eternal shall call him, OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.\rdblquote }{\cs16\f0\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super #}{ }{\f0\fs20 
Mr. English very properly takes notice of the disjunctive accent (Pasek) occurring here in the text.\emdash D.
\par }}}{\f0  [Heb.] The same is mentioned in chap. xxx. 8, 9.  \ldblquote 
And it shall be in that day, saith the Lord of Hosts, I will break his yoke from off his neck, and his bands will I burst asunder, and strangers shall no more exact service of him. But they shall serve the Lord their God, and DAVID their King, whom I will
 
raise up for (or to) them. * * * The voice of joy, and the voice of mirth, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the voice of them that say. Praise ye the Lord of Hosts, for the Lord is gracious, for his mercy endureth for ever, of them
 
that bring praise to the house of the Lord. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, yet again shall there be in this place that is desolate (Jerusalem and Palestine,) without man and beast, and in all the cities thereof, an habitation of shepherds folding sheep, in
 
the cities of the hill country, and in the cities of the plain, and in the cities of the south, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the environs of Jerusalem. *  *  * Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will perform the good thing which I have sp
oken concerning the house of Israel, and concerning the house of Judah.  }{\i\f0 In those days, and at that time, }{\f0 [he that readeth, let him }{\i\f0 observe}{\f0 ] I will }{\i\f0 came to grow up of the line of David a }{\f0 
branch of righteousness, and he shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. }{\i\f0 In those days}{\f0  Judah shall be saved, and Jerusalem, shall dwell securely, and this is he whom the Lord shall call \emdash  \lquote OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.\rquote 
 [Heb.] Surely, thus saith the Lord, there shall not be a failure in the line of David, one to sit upon the th
rone of the house of Israel, neither shall there be a failure in the line of the Priests, the Levites, of one to offer before me burnt offerings, and to perform sacrifice continually." See ch. xxxiiii. 14. In this place, the }{\i\f0 
perpetuity of the tribe of Levi,}{\f0  as well as that of }{\i\f0 the house of David,}{\f0  is foretold. See also Jer. ch. xxx. 9.
\par 
\par Contemporary with Jeremiah was }{\i\f0 Ezekiel.}{\f0  He likewise describes this happy state of the Israelites under a king of the }{\i\f0 name of David,}{\f0  chap. xxxiv.  22.
\par 
\par \ldblquote Therefore will I save m
y flock, and they shall no more be a prey: and I will judge between cattle, and cattle. And I will set up one Shepherd over them, and be shall feed them, even my servant DAVID : he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd, and I the Lord will be th
e
ir God, and my servant DAVID a Prince among them. I the Lord have spoken it. And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land; and they shall dwell safely in' the wilderness, and sleep in the woods. An
d
 I will make them, and the places round about my hill, a blessing, and I will cause the shower to come down in the season: there shall be showers of blessing. And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit; and the earth shall yield her increase; and the
y shall be safe in their land; and shall know that I am the Lord, &c.\rdblquote 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 In another passage this prophet says, that the two nations, Israel and Judah, shall have one king, and that this king shall be named DAVID, who shall reign for ever, chap. xxxvii. 21\emdash 28.  
\ldblquote 
Say unto them, thus saith the Lord God, behold I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land. And I will make them one nation in the land, upon th
e mountains of Israel, and one king shall be king to them all, and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all. Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestabl
e
 things, nor with any of their transgressions; but I will save them out of all their dwelling places wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them, so shall they be my people, and I will be their God. And DAVID my servant shall be king over them, and th
ere shall be one shepherd.  They shall also }{\i\f0 walk in my judgments,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 observe my statutes}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 do them. }{\f0 
And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt, and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their children, and their children\rquote s children }{\i\f0 for ever,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 my servant}{
\f0  DAVID shall be }{\i\f0 their prince forever.}{\f0  Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them: it shall be }{\i\f0 an everlasting covenant}{\f0  with them, and I will place them, and multiply them, and will 
set my sanctuary in the midst of them, for evermore.  My tabernacle also shall be with them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And the heathen shall know, that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall, be in the midst of 
them }{\i\f0 for}{\f0  }{\i\f0 evermore.\rdblquote }{\f0  
\par 
\par The natural construction of this seems to be this, \ldblquote that a descendant of David, called }{\i\f0 by that name,}{\f0  should reign over the Israelites for ever.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par In the very circumstantial description which Ezekiel gives of the state of the Israelites in their own country, yet expected by the Jews, he speaks of }{\i\f0 the prince,}{\f0 
 and the portion assigned him, chap. xlv. 78.   And in his description of the temple service, he moreover speaks of }{\i\f0 the gate,}{\f0  by which }{\i\f0 the prince}{\f0  is to enter into it. See chap. xlvi. 1, 2.
\par 
\par The next, and last, passage I shall quote, is from the book of Daniel, who, in the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon, had a vision of four beasts, representing the four great Empires. At the close of his account of which, he speaks of \ldblquote 
one like the son of man\rdblquote  being brought into the presence of God, and receiving from the Eternal an everlasting kingdom (chap. vii. 13)\emdash  \ldblquote 
I saw in the night visions, and behold one like the son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and come to the ancient of days; and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, }{\i\f0 
that all people, nations, and languages, should serve }{\f0 him: his dominion is }{\i\f0 an everlasting dominion,}{\f0  which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par I have now gone through the prophecies which are allowed }{\i\f0 both by Jews and Christians}{\f0  to relate to one person whom they call the Messiah. It must be evident from all these passages, that the characteristics of this, to both parties,
 highly interesting personage, as described by the Hebrew prophets, are these :\emdash                                     
\par }\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 1. That he was to be a }{\i\f0 just, beneficent, wise, and mighty monarch,}{\f0  raised up and upheld, and established by God, to be the means of promoting }{\i\f0 universal peace,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 
happiness.}{\f0  That Israel should be }{\i\f0 gathered to}{\f0  him, and established in their own land; which was to be the seat of dominion, and the centre of union, and of worship to all the people, and nations of the earth ; who were to live under
 the government, and receive, and obey the law of this beneficent prince; and enjoy unspeakable felicities }{\i\f0 on the earth,}{\f0  then changed to }{\i\f0 a universal paradise.}{\f0 
  And for all this happiness, they were to worship, and glorify the true God }{\i\f0 only,}{\f0  and glorify the Eternal, and give thanks to Him \ldblquote because He is good, and his mercy endureth forever.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par 2. That this prince was to be of the line of David, and as it should seem, }{\i\f0 called by that name,}{\f0  and was to reign on his throne in }{\i\f0 Jerusalem.
\par 
\par }{\f0 3. That according to Micah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, (see the quotations)
\par 
\par }{\i\f0 his manifestation,}{\f0  and (and the }{\i\f0 restoration of Israel}{\f0  were to be }{\i\f0 contemporaneous. }{\f0 See Hosea, chap. iii. 4, 5.  And from Jeremiah xxxiii. 15, and from Micah v. 2, it should seem also, that he }{\i\f0 
was not to be born,}{\f0  till the time of that restoration should be }{\i\f0 nearly  arrived.
\par 
\par }{\f0 The prophecies concerning the Messiah of the Jews being now laid before the reader, we have only to apply these descriptions to know whether an individual be their Messiah, or not. For, (accor
ding to the principles laid down, and established in the preceding chapter) where the foregoing characteristics given by the prophets }{\i\f0 do centre and agree,}{\f0  that person }{\i\f0 is}{\f0  the Messiah foretold; but where they are }{\i\f0 
not found}{\f0  in any one claiming that character, }{\i\f0 miracles are nothing to the purpose,}{\f0 
 and nothing is more certain, than that he has no right to be considered as such; and could he with a word turn the sun black in the face, in proof of his being the Messiah, he is, nevertheless, not to be regarded; for, whether such a person }{\i\f0 
has yet }{\f0 appeared, can certainly only be known by considering, whether the world has }{\i\f0 ever yet seen}{\f0  such a person as this Messiah of the Hebrew prophets.
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs28 CHAPTER IV.
\par }{\f0 
\par THE CHARACTER OF JESUS TESTED BY THOSE CHARACTERISTIC MARKS OF THE MESSIAH GIVEN BY THE PROPHETS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.           
\par 
\par Had Jesus of Nazareth come into the world merely as a person sent with a revelation from God, he would have had a right to be attended to, and t
ried upon that ground. And if his doctrines and precepts were consistent with reason, consistent with one another, and with prior revelations, really such, and all tending to the honour of God, and the good of men; his miracles, with these circumstances, 
ought to have determined men to believe in him.
\par 
\par But since he claimed to be the Messiah of the Jews, }{\i\f0 foretold}{\f0  by }{\i\f0 their prophets,}{\f0  it is requisite, that that claim should be made out; and it is reasonable in itself, and just to him, and necessary to all those
 who will not take their religion upon trust, that ho should be tried, by examining whether this claim can be made out, or not. The argument from prophecy becomes necessary to establish the claim of the Gospel: and as truth is consistent with itself, so t
his claim must be true, or, it destroys all others.
\par 
\par Besides, what notions of common morality must he have, who pretends to come from God, and declares (Jo. v. 37,)  \ldblquote that the Scriptures testify of him,\rdblquote  if, in fact, the Scriptures do not testify of him? Wh
at honesty, or sincerity could he have, who could \ldblquote }{\i\f0 begin at Moses, and all the prophets,}{\f0  and expound unto his disciples in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself,\rdblquote 
 if neither Moses nor the prophets ever spake a word about him? }{\i\f0 The prophets, therefore,  must decide this question, and the foundation of Christianity must be laid upon them;}{\f0 
 or else, to avoid one difficulty, Christians will be forced into such absurdities, as no man can palliate, much less can extricate himself out of.
\par 
\par Furthermore, th
is claim must be made out to the satisfaction of the Gentile, as well as the Jew. For since the fundamental article of Christianity is, that Jesus is the Christ; (Jo. xx. 31) that is to say, that he is the Messiah prophecied of in the Old Testament; whoev
e
r comes into the world as such, must come as the Messiah of the Jews, because no other nation did expect, or pretend to, the promise of a Messiah. Moreover, whoever comes as this Messiah of the Jews, must at least pretend to answer the character of their 
M
essiah plainly delivered in the writings of their prophets. And the Jews themselves receiving those writings as divine, were not bound to, neither could they consistently with their duty, receive, any, who did not answer in all points to the description t
herein given.
\par 
\par Let us now test the character of Jesus of Nazareth by the description of the Messiah given by the Hebrew prophets. If his character corresponds in }{\i\f0 all respects}{\f0 
 with that given by those prophets, he is undoubtedly to be acknowledged as the kin
g of Israel foretold; but if they do not exactly correspond, if there be the slightest incongruity, he certainly was not this Messiah. For it is evident, that some of the characteristic marks given may belong to. many illustrious individuals, but }{\i\f0 
the whole}{\f0  can belong to, and be found in, }{\i\f0 only one person.
\par 
\par }{\f0 The first characteristic of the Messiah, the reader will recollect, was, according to the prophets, that he was to be \ldblquote the Prince of Peace,\rdblquote   in whose times righteousness was to flourish, and mankind be ma
de .happy. That he was to sit upon the throne of David judging right; and that to him, and their own land, was Israel to be gathered, and all nations serve and obey him; and worship one God, even Jehovah.
\par 
\par But of Jesus we read, that he asserted, that his kingdom was }{\i\f0 \ldblquote not of this world.\rdblquote }{\f0  Instead of effecting peace among the nations, he said,  \ldblquote Think not that I am come to send peace on earth, I have come to }{\i\f0 
send a sword,}{\f0  I have come to put }{\i\f0 division}{\f0  between a son, and his father; the mother, and the daughter; the daughter-in-law, and her mother-in-law.\rdblquote   \ldblquote 
Think ye, (said he to his disciples) that I have come to put peace on earth, I tell you nay, but rather }{\i\f0 division.\rdblquote }{\f0  Again, \ldblquote I have come to put }{\i\f0 fire}{\f0  on the earth.\rdblquote 
 These are not the characteristics of the Messiah of the prophets of the Old Testament. For of him Zechariah (ch. ix.) says, that \ldblquote He shall speak }{\i\f0 peace }{\f0 to the nations;\rdblquote  and of him Isaiah says, \ldblquote 
Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war anymore.\rdblquote  And so far from being the author of }{\i\f0 division, sword,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 fire;}{\f0  according to Malachi, in the times of the Messiah, \ldblquote 
the heart of the parents was to be converted to the children, and the heart of the children to their parents.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par In the times of the Messiah, wars were to cease, righ
teousness was to  flourish, and mankind be happy. Whether this has yet taken place, the experience of almost nineteen centuries, and the present state of the world, can enable every one to determine for himself.
\par 
\par In the times of the Messiah, Israel was to 
be gathered, and planted in their own land, in honour, and prosperity. But not many years after the death of Jesus of Nazareth, the Jewish nation underwent the most dreadful calamities; and to this day, so far are they from being gathered, they are scatte
red to the four quarters of the globe. Instead of being in honour and prosperity, their history, since his time, is one dreadful record of unparalleled sufferings, written in letters of blood by the hands of murder, rapine, and cruelty.
\par 
\par Again; the true Messiah was, it seems, to be called DAVID, and was to reign at }{\i\f0 Jerusalem,}{\f0  on the throne of David; but the name \ldblquote }{\i\f0 Jesus\rdblquote }{\f0  is not the same as }{\i\f0 \ldblquote David,\rdblquote }{\f0 
 and Christians have assigned him }{\i\f0 a spiritual}{\f0  kingdom, and a throne }{\i\f0 in heaven!}{\f0   But was the throne of David in heaven ? No! it was in }{\i\f0 Jerusalem,}{\f0  and no more in Heaven, than that of the Caesars.
\par 
\par Lastly, it appears from the prophecies of Hosea, Micah, and Jeremiah, Isaiah, and Ezekiel, quoted in the last chapter, that the manifestation of their Messiah was to be }{\i\f0 contemporaneous}{\f0 
 with the restoration of Israel, and from the quotations adduced from the three first mentioned prophets, it should seem that }{\i\f0 his birth was not to take place}{\f0  many years before that glorious event. But Jesus of Nazareth was born }{\i\f0 
almost two thousand years ago;}{\f0  and the children of Israel yet expect a deliverer. And to conclude, it was foretold by Malachi, and believed by the Jews then, and ever since, that }{\i\f0 Elias the prophet,}{\f0 
 who did not die, but was removed from the earth, should }{\i\f0 precede }{\f0 the coming of the Messiah, and prepare them for his reception. But the prophet Elias certainly has }{\i\f0 not yet}{\f0  appeared!
\par 
\par Indeed, nothing appears to be more }{\i\f0 dissimilar}{\f0  than the character of the Messiah, as given by the Hebrew prophets, and that of }{\i\f0 Jesus of Nazareth.}{\f0  It se
ems scarcely credible, that a man who, though amiable and virtuous, yet lived in a low state, was poor, living upon alms, without wealth, and without power; and who (though by misfortune) died the death of a malefactor, crucified between two robbers, (a d
e
ath exactly parallel with being hanged at the public gallows in the present day) should ever be taken for that mighty prince, that universal potentate, and benefactor of the human race, foretold in the splendid language of the prophets of the Old Testamen
t.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs28 CHAPTER V.
\par }{\f0 
\par EXAMINATION OF THE ARGUMENTS FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT ADDUCED IN THE NEW, TO PROVE THAT JESUS OF NAZARETH WAS THE MESSIAH.
\par 
\par But since one would esteem it almost incredible, that the apostles could persuade men to believe Jesus to be this Mess
iah, unless they had at least some proof to offer to their conviction, let us next consider, and examine, the proofs adduced by the apostles and their followers, from the Old Testament for that purpose.
\par 
\par Of the strength or weakness of the proofs for Christianity out of the Old Testament, we are well qualified to judge, as we have the Old and New Testament in our hands ; the first containing what are offered as }{\i\f0 proofs}{\f0 
 of Christianity, and the latter the }{\i\f0 application}{\f0  of those proofs, and we should seem to have nothing more to do, but to compare the Old and New Testament together.
\par 
\par But these proofs taken out of the Old Testament, and urged in the New, being sometimes not to be found in the Old, nor urged in the New, according to the literal and obvious sense, wh
ich they appear to bear in their supposed places in the Old, and, therefore, not proofs according to the rules of interpretation established by reason, and acted upon in interpreting every other ancient book \emdash 
 almost all Christian commentators on the Bible
, and advocates for the religion of the New Testament, both ancient and modern, have judged them to be applied in a secondary, or typical, or mystical, or allegorical, or enigmatical sense; that is, in a sense different from the obvious and literal sense 
which they bear in the Old Testament.
\par 
\par Thus, for example, Matthew, after having given an account of the conception of Mary, and the birth of Jesus, says (ch. i.,)  \ldblquote All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, Behold
 a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Immanuel.\rdblquote  But the words as they stand in Isaiah ch. vii. 14, from whence they are taken, do, in their obvious and literal sense, relate to a }{\i\f0 
young woman}{\f0  in the days of Ahaz, King of Judah, as will appear, considering the context.
\par 
\par When Rezin, King of Syria, and Pekah, King of Israel, were confederates in arms together, against Ahaz, King of Judah, Isaiah the prophet was sent by God, first to comfort Ahaz and the nation
, and then to assure them by a sign, that his enemies should in a little time be confounded.. \emdash   But Ahaz refusing a sign at the prophet\rquote s hand, the prophet said (see the chapter,)  \ldblquote 
The Lord shall give you a sign. Behold a virgin, or }{\i\f0  \lquote young woman\rquote }{\f0  (for the Hebrew word means }{\i\f0 both}{\f0 
 as was truly and justly asserted by the Jews in the primitive ages against the Christians, and is now acknowledged, and. established beyond dispute by the best Hebrew scholars of this age,) shall conceive and bear a son, and shall
 call his name Immanuel.  Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil and choose the good.  For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land which thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings.
\rdblquote  
And this sign is accordingly given Ahaz by the prophet, who, ch. viii. v. 2, 18, took two witnesses and went to the said young woman, who in due time conceived, and bare a son, after whose birth the projects of Rezin and Pekah were, it appears, soon confo
unded, according to the prophecy and }{\i\f0 sign}{\f0  given by the prophet.
\par 
\par And the prophet himself, puts it beyond dispute, that this is the proper interpretation of the prophecy, by }{\i\f0 express words,}{\f0  as well as by his whole narration ; for he says, \ldblquote Behold I, and }{\i\f0 the children}{\f0 
 whom the Lord hath given me, are for }{\i\f0 signs,}{\f0  and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of Hosts, that dwelleth in mount Zion.\rdblquote  Isaiah viii. 19.
\par 
\par This is the plain drift and design of the prophet, literally, obviously, and primarily understood; and thu
s he is understood by one of the most judicious of interpreters, the great Grotius.  Indeed, to understand the prophet as having the conception of Mary, and the birth of her son Jesus from a virgin mother literally, and primarily in view, is a very great 
absurdity, and contrary to the very intent and design of the sign given by the prophet.
\par 
\par For the sign being given by Isaiah to convince Ahaz that he brought a message from God to him, }{\i\f0 to assure him}{\f0  that the two kings should not succeed in their attempt against him, how could a virgin\rquote s conception, and bearing a son }{
\i\f0 seven hundred years afterwards,}{\f0  be }{\i\f0 a sign to Ahaz,}{\f0  that the prophet came to }{\i\f0 him,}{\f0  with the said message }{\i\f0 from God}{\f0  ? And how }{\i\f0 useless}{\f0  was it to Ahaz, as well as }{\i\f0 absurd in itself}{\f0 
 for the prophet, to say,  \ldblquote Before the child, born }{\i\f0 seven hundred years hence,}{\f0  shall distinguish between good and evil, the land which thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings,\rdblquote  which would be a }{\i\f0 banter,}{
\f0  instead of a sign.
\par 
\par But a prophecy of the }{\i\f0 certain}{\f0  birth of a }{\i\f0 male}{\f0  child, by a }{\i\f0 particular female}{\f0  within }{\i\f0 a short time,}{\f0  seems a proper sign, as being not only what could not }{\i\f0 with certainty,}{\f0 
 be foretold, except by a person inspired, but considered }{\i\f0 as soon coming to pass,}{\f0  it, consequently, evidences itself to be a divine sign, and answers all the purposes of a sign. And such a sign is agreeable to God\rquote 
s conduct on like occasions; witness his conduct to Gideon and Hezekiah. Jud. vi.; 2 Kings xx. 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 This prophecy, therefore, not being fulfilled in Jesus, according to the literal a
nd obvious sense of the words as they stand in Isaiah, it is supposed that this, like the other prophecies cited in the New Testament, is fulfilled in a secondary, or typical, or mystical sense; that is, the said prophecy, which was literally fulfilled by
 the birth of the son foretold by the prophet, was }{\i\f0 again}{\f0  fulfilled by the birth of Jesus, as being an event of the same kind, and intended to be secretly and mystically signified either by the prophet or by God, who directed the prophet
\rquote s speech. If the reader desires further satisfaction that the literal and obvious sense of this prophecy relates to a son to be born in Isaiah's time, and }{\i\f0 not}{\f0  to Jesus, he is referred to the commentator Grotius, and to Huetius
\rquote  }{\i\f0 Demonstrat. Evang. in}{\f0  loc., to the ancient fathe
rs, and to the most respectable of the modern Christian. commentators, who all allow and show, that the words of Isaiah are not applicable to the birth of Jesus in their literal sense, but only in a mystical, or figurative, or allegorical sense.
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 
\par Again, \tab Matthew gives us another prophecy, which he says was }{\i\f0  fulfilled. }{\f0 He tells us, that Jesus was carried into Egypt; from whence he returned after the death of Herod, (Mat. ii.) \ldblquote that it might be }{\i\f0 fulfilled,}{\f0 
 which was of the Lord by the prophet, saying, \lquote out of Egypt have I called my son.\rquote \rdblquote  Which, being word for word in Hosea, (ch. xi. 1) and no where else to be found in the Old Testament, are supposed }{\i\f0 to}{\f0 
 be taken from thence; where according to their }{\i\f0 obvious}{\f0  sense they are }{\i\f0 no prophecy at all!}{\f0   but relate and refer to }{\i\f0 a past action,}{\f0 
 viz., to the calling of the children of Israel out of Egypt, which will, I think, be denied by few. This passage, therefore, or as it is styled, prophecy, of Hosea, is said by learned men among  Christians to be mystically, or allegori
cally, applied, in order to render Matthew\rquote s application of it, just; and they say all other methods of some learned men to solve the difficulty arising from Matthew's citation of this passage, have proved unsuccessful.
\par 
\par Again, Matthew says, (ch. ii.) \ldblquote Jesus came, and dwelt at Nazareth, that it might be }{\i\f0 fulfilled,}{\f0  which was spoken by the prophet, saying, \lquote he shall be called a Nazarene;\rquote \rdblquote 
  but as this passage does not occur in the Old Testament }{\i\f0 at all,}{\f0  we are precluded from ascertaining whether it be literal, mystical, or allegorical.
\par 
\par Jesus says of John the Baptist, (Mat. xi. 14) \ldblquote This is Elias that was }{\i\f0 for }{\f0 to come,\rdblquote  wherein he is supposed to refer to these words of Malachi, (ch. iv. 4)  \ldblquote 
Behold I will send you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord,\rdblquote  which, according to }{\i\f0 their literal, and }{\f0 obvious sense, are a prophecy, that Elijah or Elias was to come }{\i\f0 in person}{\f0 
 (which we know from the New Testament, as well as elsewhere, was the constant expectation of the Jews.) Besides, this Elijah was to come \ldblquote before the great and terrible day of the Lord,\rdblquote 
 which has not yet arrived; and, therefore, this prophecy of Malachi, referred .to by the evangelist, was certainly not literally, but only mystically, fulfilled in John the Baptist.
\par 
\par Again, Jesus (Mat. xiii.) cites the prophecy of Isaiah (Is. vi. 9,) \ldblquote By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand;\rdblquote  and he assures us, that it was fulfilled in }{\i\f0 his time}{\f0 
 in those to whom he spake in parables, (which, by the way, he did, it is said, in order }{\i\f0 to fulfil}{\f0 
 a passage of the Psalms) though it is manifest that the prophecy of Isaiah quoted, according to its literal sense, undoubtedly relates to the obstinate Jews who lived in the time of Isaiah.
\par 
\par In fine, these, and the many other passages cited as }{\i\f0 prophecies}{\f0 
 from the Old Testament by the authors of the New, do so plainly relate, in their obvious and primary sense to other matters than those which they are adduced to prove, that it is allowed by the most learned defenders of Christianity, t
hat to pretend that they prove in a literal sense what they are adduced to prove, is to give up with both hands the cause of Christianity to the enemies thereof, who can so easily show in so many undoubted instances, the Old and New Testament to have no m
anner of connection in }{\i\f0 that respect, }{\f0 but to be in an irreconcilable state.
\par 
\par These proofs from the prophets being so different from what we should expect, it behoves us to enquire what could induce Jesus and his apostles to quote the Old Testament in such a manner?
\par 
\par The Jews shortly answer this question, by saying, that they did so, because they did not understand the meaning of the books they quoted. But it has been answered by some learned Christians, that Jesus }{\i\f0 and the }{\f0 
apostles did not quote in the manner they did through caprice or ignorance bat according to certain methods of interpretation, which were in their times of established authority among the Jews.
\par 
\par The rules of interpretation, which were supposed to be irrecoverably  lost afterwards recovered to
 the world by the learned Surenhusius, professor of the Hebrew language in the illustrious school of Amsterdam. He made an ample discovery to the world of the rules by which the apostles cited the Old Testament, and argued from thence, wherein the whole m
ystery of the apostles applying scripture in a secondary, or typical, or allegorical  sense, seems to be unfolded. I shall, therefore, state this matter from Surenhusius.
\par 
\par He (Surenhusius) says, \ldblquote that when he considered the various opinions Of the learned about the passages of the Old Testament quoted in the New, }{\i\f0 He was filled with grief,}{\f0 
 not knowing where to set his foot; and was much concerned, that what had been done with good success upon profane authors, could not be so happily performed upon the sacred.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par He tells us, \ldblquote 
that having had frequent occasions to converse with the Jews (on account of his application to Hebrew literature from his youth) who insolently reflected upon the New Testament, affirming it to be plainly corrupted, because it seldom or n
ever agreed with the Old Testament, some of whom were so confident in this opinion, as to say, they would profess the Christian religion, if any one could reconcile the New Testament with the Old. }{\i\f0 \ldblquote I was the more}{\f0 
 grieved, because, (says this honest and well meaning man) I knew not how to apply a }{\i\f0 remedy to this evil.\rdblquote }{\f0 
 But the matter being of great importance, he discoursed with several learned men about it, and read the books of others, being persuaded that the authors of the books of the New Testament had w
ritten nothing but what was suited to the time wherein they lived, and that Christ and his apostles had constantly followed the method of their ancestors. After he had long revolved this hypothesis in his mind, at last he met with a Rabbi well skilled in 
t
he Talmud, the Cabbala, and the allegorical  books of the Jews. This Rabbi had once embraced the Christian religion, but was again relapsed to Judaism on account of the idolatry of the Papists, yet not perfectly disbelieving the integrity of the New Testa
m
ent. Surenhusius asked him, what he thought of the passages of the Old Testament quoted in the New, whether they were rightly quoted or not, and whether the Jews had any just reason to cavil at them, and at the same time proposed to him two or three passa
ges, which had very much exercised the most learned Christian commentators.
\par 
\par The Rabbi having admirably explained those passages, to the great surprise of Surenhusius, and confirming his explications by several places of the Talmud, and other writings of th
e Jewish commentators, and allegorical writers, Surenhusius asked him what would be the best method to write a treatise in order to vindicate the passages of the Old Testament quoted in the New? The Rabbi answered, that he \ldblquote 
thought the best way of succeedi
ng in such an undertaking would be to peruse a great part of the Talmud, and the allegorical and literal commentators; to observe their several ways of quoting and interpreting scripture, and to collect as many materials of that kind, as would be sufficie
nt for that purpose.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Surenhusius took the hint immediately: he read such books as were recommended, observed every thing that might be subservient to his design, and made a book upon the subject. And in the third part of that book he }{\i\f0 gives us}{\f0  the rules so
 long sought after, viz., the ten ways}{\cs16\f0\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super #}{ }{\f0\fs20 
For a more correct enumeration of the thirteen cabalistic rules of exposition, the English reader is referred to vol. 1, page 209, of the \ldblquote Conciliator\rdblquote  of B. Menasseh ben Israel, translated by E, H. Lindo, Esqr.\emdash D.
\par }{\f0\cf11 
\par }}}{\f0  used, he says, by the Jewish doctors in citing scripture. And here they are:\emdash 
\par 
\par 1. The first rule is\emdash  \ldblquote reading the words of the Hebrew bible, not according to the points placed under them, but according to other points }{\i\f0 substituted}{\f0  in their stead,\rdblquote  as is 
done by Peter, Acts iii. 3; by Stephen, Acts vii. 43, and by Paul, 1 Cor. xv. 54; 2 Cor. viii. 16, and Heb. iii. 10; ix. 21; xii. 6.
\par 
\par 2. The second rule is\emdash   \ldblquote }{\i\f0 changing}{\f0  the letters, whether those letters be of the same organ (as the Hebrew grammarians speak,) or not,\rdblquote 
 as is done by Paul, Rom. ix. 33; 1 Cor. xi. 9; Heb. viii. 9, and x. 6; and by Stephen, Acts vii. 43.
\par 
\par 3. The third is\emdash    \ldblquote changing both }{\i\f0 letters}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 points,\rdblquote }{\f0  as is done by Paul, Acts xiii. 41, and 2 Cor. viii. 15.
\par 
\par 4. The fourth is\emdash  \ldblquote }{\i\f0 adding}{\f0  some letters, and }{\i\f0 taking away}{\f0  others.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par 5. The fifth is\emdash  \ldblquote }{\i\f0 transposing}{\f0  words and letters.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par 6. The sixth is\emdash  \ldblquote }{\i\f0 dividing}{\f0  one word into two.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par 7. The seventh is\emdash  \ldblquote adding other words to those in the text, in order to make the sense more clear, and to }{\i\f0 accommodate it}{\f0  to the subject they we upon.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par 8.. The eighth is\emdash  \ldblquote changing }{\i\f0 the order of}{\f0  words.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par 9. The ninth is\emdash  \ldblquote changing the }{\i\f0 order of}{\f0  words, and adding }{\i\f0 other words.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 10. The tenth is\emdash  \ldblquote changing the order of words, adding words, and }{\i\f0 retrenching}{\f0  words,\rdblquote  which, (says he) is a method often used by }{\i\f0 Paul.}{\f0 
 Of the application of all these rules, he gives examples taken from the New Testament.
\par 
\par It is not necessary to make many observations upon these rules, they speak for themselves most significantly; for what is there that cannot be proved from the Old Testament, or any other book, yea, from Euclid\rquote 
s Elements! or even an old almanac! by the help of  \ldblquote altering words and sentences; adding; retrenching; and transposing, and cutting words in two,\rdblquote  as is stated abo
ve by a learned and good man, and sincere Christian who found out, and brought forward, these rules, as the best means of getting the authors of the New Testament out of a difficulty, which had long shocked and grieved their best friends.
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs28 CHAPTER VI.
\par }{\f0 
\par EXAMINATION OF THE MEANING OF THE PHRASE \ldblquote THIS WAS DONE THAT IT MIGHT BE FULFILLED.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par It may be objected from divers learned authors, who have been very sensible of the difficulties stated in the preceding chapters, and have, sensible of the difficulties stat
ed in the preceding chapters, therefore, taken other ground than their predecessors, in order to defend themselves the better; I say, it may be objected to what I have advanced, that Christianity is not in fact grounded on the prophetical, or other, quota
tions made from the Old, in the New, Testament; but that those quotations being allegorically applied by the authors of the New Testament, are merely arguments }{\i\f0 ad hominem,}{\f0 
 to convince the Jews of the truth of Christianity, who allowed such a method of arguing to be valid, and are not arguments to the rest of mankind.
\par 
\par To which I answer\emdash That this distinction is the }{\i\f0 pure invention}{\f0  of those who make the objection, and not only has no foundation in the New Testament, but is utterly subverted by its express decla
rations; for the authors of the books of the New Testament always argue }{\i\f0 absolutely}{\f0 
 from the quotations they cite as prophecies out of the books of the Old Testament. Moses and the prophets are every where represented to be a just foundation for Christianity; and the author of the Epistle to the Romans expressly says, ch. xvi. 26, 26, 
\ldblquote The gospel, which was kept secret since the world began, was now }{\i\f0 made manifest by the scriptures of the prophets}{\f0  (wherein that gospel was secretly contained) }{\i\f0 to all nations,\rdblquote  }{\f0 
 by the means of the preachers of the gospel who gave the secret or spiritual sense of those scriptures; for to the ancient Jews, according to them, the gospel was preached by the types of their law, and, therefore, must have been considered as truly cont
ained in it.
\par 
\par Besides, the authors of the books of the New Testament were convinced long before the publication of them, that the gospel was to be preached to the Gentiles as well as the Jews, to both of whom, therefore, they reasoned allegorically in their
 books, as Peter and others did in their sermons, though with greater success on Gentiles than on Jews; and as Paul did before Felix, when he said he took his heresy, or Christianity, from the law, and the  prophets. Acts xxiv., as also he did before Agri
p
pa. It would, therefore, seem strange, that books written to all the world by men equally concerned to convert Gentiles as well as Jews, and that discourses made expressly to Gentiles as well as to Jews, should be designed to be pertinent only to Jews, mu
c
h less to a very few Jews! Indeed, I am ashamed at being thus long engaged in showing what must be self evident; and did I not fear being further tedious to my readers, I would undertake to bring together passages from the New Testament, where the meaning
 and intention of the writers is obvious, in such abundance, as would immediately and entirely put the hypothesis of our opponents out of countenance.
\par 
\par These quotations from the. Old Testament are certainly urged, and spoken of as direct proofs, as absolute proofs in themselves, and not as mere proofs }{\i\f0 ad hominem to}{\f0 
 the Jews; for if these prophecies are only urged by the apostles as proofs to the Jews, and intended only as proofs founded on the mistaken meanings of the Old Testament of some Jews of their time
, what sense is there in appealing upon all occasions to the prophets, and recommending the reading and search of the Old Testament for the trial and proof of what was preached? for that was to proceed on weakness itself, knowing it to be so.  Certainly n
o
thing, but a real persuasion, that the prophecies of the Old Testament were really fulfilled in Jesus, could make them every where inculcate and appeal to the fulfilling of prophecy. In order to support their hypothesis, Christians have been forced to see
k evidence to prove, that the phrase\emdash  \ldblquote this was done that it might be fulfilled,\rdblquote 
 so frequent in the New Testament, meant no such thing, but was only a habit the Jews had got of introducing by such phrases a handsome quotation, or allusion, from the Old Tes
tament. But this evasion must be given up, upon two accounts.  1. Because most of the European biblical critics of the present day (the learned annotator on Michaelis\rquote 
 Introduction to the New Testament, Dr. Marsh, among others) frankly acknowledge it not t
o be tenable; and 2. Because it can be proved not to be so from the New Testament itself. For example, when John represents (Jo. xix. 28,) Jesus upon the cross saying,  \ldblquote \rquote }{\i\f0 I thirst\rquote }{\f0  that the scripture }{\i\f0 
might be fulfilled,\rdblquote  }{\f0  doth he not plainly represent Jesus as fulfilling a prophecy which foretold that the Messiah should thirst, or say, }{\i\f0 \ldblquote I thirst,\rdblquote }{\f0  upon the cross? Nay, does he not suppose him to }{
\i\f0 say so, in order to fulfil,}{\f0  or that }{\i\f0 he might}{\f0  fulfil, a prophecy? Is it not also suitable to the character of Jesus
, who founded his Messiahship on the prophecies in the Old Testament, and could not but have the accomplishment of those prophecies constantly in view to fulfil, and to intend to fulfil them? And is it not unsuitable in John, in describing his master dyin
g upon the cross, to represent him as saying things, whereby he only gave occasion to observe, that he fulfilled, i. e., }{\i\f0 accommodated a phrase!}{\f0  not a prophecy !!
\par 
\par Besides, they who set up this accommodating principle of accommodation, do, in some cases, tak
e the term fulfilled in its proper sense, and do allow it, (when convenient) to relate to a prophecy really fulfilled. But I would ask them, what rule they have to know when the apostles mean a prophecy fulfilled, and when a phrase accommodated, since the
y are acknowledged to use the strong expression of fulfilling in the latter case no less than in the former?
\par 
\par In a word, unless it be granted, that the citations were intended by the authors of the New Testament, to be adduced, and app
lied, as prophecies fulfilled; if you do suppose them not intended to be adduced, and applied, as prophecies; then, the whole affair of Jesus being foretold as the Messiah, is reduced to an accommodation of phrases! and it will, assuredly, follow, that th
e citations of Jesus and his apostles out of the Old Testament, are }{\i\f0 like }{\f0 and no better than the work of, the Empress Eudoxia, who wrote the History of Jesus in verses }{\i\f0 put together,}{\f0  and borrowed out of \emdash 
 HOMER ! or that of Proba Palconia, who did the same, in verses, and words taken out of \emdash  Virgil!
\par 
\par In fine, one of two things must be allowed, either (which is most probable) the authors of the New Testament conceived their citations to be indeed prophecies concerning Jesus, and then they were ignorant and blu
ndered, and, therefore; were not inspired; or, they knowingly used them as means to deceive the simple and credulous into a belief of their being testimonies sufficient to prove what they themselves knew they had no relation to; \emdash 
 and then they were deceivers : there is no other alternative, and each horn of the dilemma, must prove as fatal as the other.
\par 
\par Perhaps it may be said, \ldblquote It is to no purpose for you to object to the quotations or the arguments of Jesus and his apostles, for God was with them confirming their doctrine by signs following, they had from }{\i\f0 God}{\f0 
 the power of working miracles, and, consequently, their interpretations of Scripture, however strange they may appear to your minds, must be infallible, they being men inspired.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par To this argument it
 can be justly answered, first, that the question whether Jesus be the Messiah, entirely depends, as proved before, upon his answering the characteristics given of that personage by the Jewish prophets; and all the miracles in the world could never, from 
the nature of the case, prove him to be so, unless his character does entirely agree with the archetype laid down by them, as had been already abundantly proved.
\par 
\par Secondly,\emdash  That whether these miracles were really performed, or not, depends entirely upon th
e credibility of the authors themselves who have thus quoted! which, as shall be shown hereafter, may be disputed; and, thirdly, it could be retorted upon }{\i\f0 Protestants,}{\f0 
 that this same argument is the  same in principle with the often refuted popish argument
ation. The Papists pretend to derive all their new invented and absurd doctrines and practices from the scriptures by their interpretations of them ; but yet, when their interpretations are attacked from scripture, they immediately }{\i\f0 
fly from thence }{\f0 to }{\i\f0 the miracles}{\f0  wrought in their church, and to the visions of their }{\i\f0 holy men }{\f0 
and saints, for the establishment of their interpretations, by which they support those very doctrines and practices.  And particularly they endeavour to prove thus the doctrine of trans
ubstantiation, from the numerous miracles affirmed to have been wrought in its behalf, which reasoning Protestant Christians assert to be an argument absurd and inconclusive, therefore, they should not use it themselves.
\par 
\par We allow, that if these interpretations of the sense of the Old Testament had been in existence }{\i\f0 before}{\f0 
 the Christian era, it might be something. But we beg leave to remind them, that it is certain, that these interpretations were not published till }{\i\f0 after}{\f0  the events to which they are referred took place, which is a circumstance of }{\i\f0 
obvious significancy.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 In fine, to this argument I would answer, as in Cicero (de Natura Deor. Ed. Dav. p. 209) Cotta did to Balbus\emdash  \ldblquote }{\i\f0 rumoribus}{\f0  mecum pugnas, ego autem a te roitones requiro.
\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0\fs28 CHAPTER VII.
\par }{\f0 
\par EXAMINATION OF THE ARGUMENTS ALLEGED FROM THE HEBREW PROPHETS, TO PBOVE THAT JESUS WAS THE MESSIAH.
\par 
\par But it may be asked, how it was possible, that wise and good men could have been led to embrace the religion of the New Testament, if there were not in the Old Te
stament some prophecies which might be conceived by them to supply, at least, plausible arguments to prove that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah? Are there no other passages in the prophets besides those quoted in the New Testament, and are there not a f
ew passages quoted in the New Testament, which appear more to the purpose than those we have been considering ? To this I candidly answer that there are, and this chapter will be devoted to the consideration of them.
\par 
\par Two of these prophecies, one from Genes
is, and the other from Daniel, are thought by the advocates of Christianity, (because they conceive them to point out and to limit the time of the coming of the Messiah,) to be stronger in their favour than any of those quoted in die New Testament. If so,
 it is a very singular circumstance, that the inspired authors of the New Testament did not make use of }{\i\f0 them,}{\f0 
 instead of others not so much to the purpose. This circumstance of itself should teach us to examine the prophecies in question with caution, and a
lso with candour, since many worthy and religious men have thought them sufficient to prove that Jesus was indeed the Messiah. These prophecies I shall reserve last for consideration, and shall now begin with the others usually adduced, taking them up pre
tty much in the order }{\i\f0 in }{\f0 which they stand in the Old Testament.
\par 
\par The first passage is taken from Deut. xviii. 15,  \ldblquote The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, like unto me, unto him ye shall hearken. According to all that tho
u desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the day of the assembly, saying. Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my God, neither let me see his great fire any more, that I die not. And the Lord said unto me, they have well spoken that which they 
h
ave spoken. I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and I will put my words into his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I command him. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my, words wh
ich he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par This passage is pertinaciously and solely applied to Jesus, by many Christian writers, because it is so applied by Peter in the 2 chap. of Acts, in his sermon to the Jews, just after he had received
 the full inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and of course must be considered as infallible. Nevertheless, these words of Moses are supposed by many learned men, both Jews and Christians, to be spoken of Joshua, whom Moses himself afterwards, at the command 
a
nd appointment of God, declared to be his successor, and who was endowed with the spirit which was upon Moses, (see Deut. xxxi. 33, xxxiv. 17,) and to whom the Jews then promised to hearken, and pay obedience to, as they had done before to Moses. But othe
rs understand them to be a promise of }{\i\f0 a succession of prophets,}{\f0 
 to whom the Jews might upon all occasions have recourse; and one or the other of these seems to be the certain meaning of the place. From this consideration, that from the context it appears Moses was giving the Jews directions of }{\i\f0 immediate}{\f0 
 use; and, therefore, in promising a prophet to them, to whom they should hearken, he seems to intend an }{\i\f0 immediate}{\f0  prophet who might be of use to the Jews, and answer their common exigencies, and not a prophet }{\i\f0 two thousand years }{
to come.
\par }{\f0 
\par But I take the words to promise a }{\i\f0 succession of prophets,}{\f0  and for that }{\i\f0 sense}{\f0  wherein Grotius and Le Clerc, and most of the Jews, take them. I shall give my reasons, for this, and show that they do not necessarily refer to Jesu
s Christ.
\par 
\par Moses, in the verses preceding this prophecy in the same chapter, (Deut. xviii. }{\i\f0  9\emdash }{\f0 14) tells the Israelites from God, that \ldblquote 
when they came into Canaan, they should not learn to do after, the abominations of the people thereof; and, particularly, that there should not be found among them }{\i\f0 any }{\f0 one that useth }{\i\f0 divination, or}{\f0 
 an observer of times, &c., or a consulter with familiar spirits, &c. For all, says he, \ldblquote that do these things are an abomination to the Lord; and because of these abominations the 
Lord thy God doth drive these people out from before thee.  For these nations which thou shalt possess hearkened unto observers of times, and unto diviners. But as for thee, the Lord thy God hath not suffered thee to do so.\rdblquote 
 Then follow the words about the prophet, \ldblquote The Lord thy God will raise unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee of thy brethren like unto me, unto him ye shall hearken.\rdblquote  All which is as much as to say, \ldblquote 
When you come into Canaan, do not hearten to a diviner, &c., as the Canaanites do, for the Lord will give you a prophet of your own brethren inspired like me, to guide any instruct you, to whom ye shall hearken.\rdblquote  Or rather, \ldblquote 
Do not hearken to diviners, &c., but to prophets, who shall be raised up among you.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Now that the words cited must relate to a succession of prophets to begin upon the Israelites taking possession of the land of Canaan, is manifest; because, the raising up of a prophet, to whom they were to hearken, is }{\i\f0 the reason given}{\f0 
 why they should }{\i\f0 not hearken}{\f0  to a diviner, &c., when they came to that land; which reason could have no force unless they were to have, 1st,\emdash  an immediate prophet in Canaan; for what sense is there, or would there be, in saying,  
\ldblquote Don\rquote t hearken to such diviners as are in Canaan, when you }{\i\f0 come there, for}{\f0  you shall have a prophet of your own, to whom ye shall hearken two thousand years after you come there !\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Secondly,\emdash  As the context shows that the prophet to be raised up, was an immediate prophet, so it also shows, that the }{\i\f0 singular number here stands for the plural,}{\f0 
 according to the frequent custom of the Hebrew language, as is shown by Le Clerc and Stillingfleet, in loco; for one single prophet to be raised up immediately, who might soon die, could not be a reason why Jews of }{\i\f0 succeeding}{\f0 
 generations should not harken to diviners in Canaan.
\par 
\par Finally,\emdash  The words of God by Moses, which follow the promise of a prophet, evidently show that by that promise }{\i\f0 prophets}{\f0  were intended, in laying- down a rule for the test or trial of the prophets before mentioned, in 
such a manner as implies, that that rule was to be applied to all prophets pretending to come from him. See the words in Deut. xviii., 19\emdash 22. 
\par 
\par I shall conclude this explication, by adducing, in confirmation of it, the paraphrase of the words given in the Targum of Jonathan. \ldblquote 
The nations you are about to possess, (says the Jewish paraphrast) hearken to jugglers and diviners ; but you shall not be like them; for }{\i\f0 your priests}{\f0  shall enquire by Urim and Thummim, and the Lord your God shall give you a true prophet.
\rdblquote   And this explication is the one adopted by Origen,\emdash [Contra Celsum, p. 28.]
\par 
\par As to the difficulty that is raised against this explication from the words at the end of Deuteronomy\emdash  \ldblquote that there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses whom th
e Lord knew face to face.  In all the signs and wonders which the Lord sent him to do,\rdblquote  &c.\emdash it is nothing at all. For every one perceives, that the word \ldblquote like\rdblquote 
 may be, and frequently is, used in scripture, and in common language, to signify, similarity in some, though not in every, particular; and every prophet, who speaks by God\rquote s direction, is a prophet \ldblquote like unto Moses,\rdblquote 
 who did the same, though he be not like, or equal to, him  \ldblquote in doing signs and wonders,\rdblquote  which is all that is affirmed in the last chapter of Deuteronomy.  
\par 
\par And, finally, }{\i\f0 there}{\f0  is nothing to limit this prophecy to Jesus of Nazareth, if we allowed (what we reject) the Christian interpretation ; since God might to-morrow, if such were his will, raise up a prophet like unto Moses in every r
espect, which Jesus certainly was }{\i\f0 not;}{\f0  therefore, it cannot be applied and restrained to the purpose for which it is quoted by Peter.
\par 
\par There is in the same sermon, in the 2 chap. of Acts, another passage quoted by Peter from the Psalms, and applied by him 
to prove the resurrection of Jesus, and on which he lays very great stress, which after all seems to be nothing to the purpose. Peter says, \ldblquote 
Him (i. e., Jesus) God hath raised up, having loosed the pains [or bands] of death, because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.\rdblquote  And why ?  \ldblquote For [because] David }{\i\f0 speaketh concerning him, \lquote }{\f0 
 I foresaw the Lord always before  my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad; moreover als
o my flesh shall rest in hope. Because thou wilt not leave my soul in Hades, [the place of departed Spirits] nor suffer thy }{\i\f0 holy one to}{\f0  see }{\i\f0 corruption,}{\f0 
 thou hast made known to me the ways of life ; thou shalt make me full of joy with thy countenance.\rquote  Men 
and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is with us unto this day. Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins 
according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit upon his throne. He, seeing this before, }{\i\f0 spake of the resurrection of Christ, }{\f0 that his soul was not left in Hades, neither did }{\i\f0 his}{\f0  flesh see corruption.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\i\f0 How imposing is this argument!}{\f0  How plausible it appears! And yet it is irrelevant, as Dr. Priestly frankly confesses, who tries to save the credit of the apostle by the convenient principle of accommodation! The whole force of Peter\rquote 
s reasoning depends upon the word \ldblquote corruption.\rdblquote  David did see corruption; therefore, he could not mean himself, but \ldblquote being a prophet,\rdblquote  }{\i\f0 &c.,}{\f0  he meant Jesus Christ.  Now, the whole of Peter\rquote 
s argument is grounded upon two mistakes; for, 1st, the Hebrew word translated }{\i\f0 \ldblquote }{\f0 corruption,\rdblquote  here signifies \ldblquote }{\i\f0 destruction, perdition;\rdblquote }{\f0  and in the next place, instead of being  \ldblquote }
{\i\f0 thy holy One,\rdblquote }{\f0  in the singular, it is in the Hebrew \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 thy saints,\rdblquote }{\f0 
 in general. The passage is quoted from the 16th Psalm; and I will give a literal translation of it from the original, which will make the propriety or impropriety of Peter\rquote 
s quotation perfectly obvious. The contents and import of the Psalm, according to the English version, are as follow; \ldblquote David, in distrust of his merits, and hatred of idolatry, fleeth to God for preservation, He showeth the hope of hi
s calling, of the resurrection, and of life everlasting.\rdblquote  And the passage in question, according to the original, reads thus:\emdash  \ldblquote 
 I have set the Lord always before me: Because he is on my right hand, I shall not be moved: Therefore my heart is glad, and my 
glory [i. e., tongue] rejoiceth: My flesh also shall rest in hope. For thou wilt not leave my soul in Hades, neither wilt thou suffer }{\i\f0 thy saints to}{\f0  see }{\i\f0 destruction. }{\f0 
Thou wilt show me the path of life: In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.\rdblquote  That is\emdash \ldblquote 
Because I have ever trusted in thee, and experienced thy constant protection, therefore I will not fear death; because thou wilt not for over leave my soul in the place of departed spirits, nor suffer thy saints to }{\i\f0 perish from existence.}{\f0 
 Thou wilt raise me from the dead, and make me happy for ever in thy presence.\rdblquote }{\cs16\f0\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super #}{ }{\f0\fs20 
Mr. E. was, doubtless, aware that this is an exposition given by Jewish Commentators.\emdash D.
\par }}}{\f0 
\par 
\par In the 4th chap. of the Acts, the apostles are represented as praying to God, and referring in their prayer to the 2d Psalm \ldblquote }{\i\f0 why}{\f0 
 did the heathen rage," &c., as being a prophecy of the opposition of the Jews to Jesus; with how much justice may be seen from these circumstances.
\par 
\par 1. That \ldblquote the nations,\rdblquote  as it is in the original, did }{\i\f0 not}{\f0  assemble together to crucify Jesus, as this was done by a few soldiers. 2. The \ldblquote kings of the }{\i\f0 earth\rdblquote  }{\f0 
 had no hand in it, for they knew nothing about it. And 3rdly, Those who were concerned did by no means \ldblquote form vain designs,\rdblquote  since they e
ffected their cruel purposes.  And lastly, From that time to the present, God has not set Jesus as his king upon the \ldblquote holy hill of Sion,\rdblquote  as the Psalm imports, nor given him \ldblquote 
the nations for his inheritance, nor the uttermost parts of the earth for a possession.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par The next prophecy usually adduced to prove that Jesus is the Messiah, is The passage quoted from Micah v. 2, in the 2d chapter of Mat.\emdash  \ldblquote 
But from Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the chiefs of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is, to be ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from old, from the days of hidden ages.\rdblquote 
 This passage probably refers to the Messiah, but by no means signifies that this Messiah was }{\i\f0 to be born}{\f0  in Bethlehem, as asserted by Matthew; but only, that he was to be }{\i\f0 derived from}{\f0 
 Bethlehem, the city of Jesse, the father of David of famous memory, whose family was venerable for its antiquity, \ldblquote  being of the days of hidden ages.\rdblquote  And this interpretation is known, and acknowledged, by Hebrew s
cholars. But in order to cut short the dispute, }{\i\f0 w will permit }{\f0 the passage to be interpreted as signifying that Bethlehem was to be the birth place of the Messiah. What then ? Will a man\rquote 
s being born in Bethlehem be sufficient to make him to be the Messiah foretold by the Hebrew prophets ? Surely it has been made plain in the beginning of this work, that many more characteristic marks than this }{\i\f0 must meet in one person }{\f0 
in order to constitute him the Messiah described by them!
\par 
\par In Zechariah ix. 9, it is written, \ldblquote Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Sion, Shout, O Daughter of Jerusalem! Behold thy king cometh unto thee, the righteous one, and }{\i\f0 saved,}{\f0 
 or preserved [according to the Hebrew] lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt, the foal of an ass.\rdblquote  This has been applied by the evangelists to Jesus, who rode upon an ass into Jerusalem.
\par 
\par But in the first place, it is to be observed, that there seems to have been a blunder in this transaction; for according to the Hebrew idiom of the passage quoted above, the personage there spoken of, was to ride upon \ldblquote an }{\i\f0 ass\rquote 
 colt;\rdblquote  }{\f0 whereas, the apostles, in order to be sure of fulfilling the prophecy, represent Jesus as riding upon an }{\i\f0 ass, and the colt, too !}{\f0  " They spread their garments upon them, and set him upon }{\i\f0 them."}{\f0  [See t
he evangelists in loc.] In the next place, a man may ride into Jerusalem upon an ass, without being thus necessarily demonstrated to be the Messiah. And unless, as said before, }{\i\f0 every tittle}{\f0 
 of the marks given by the prophets to designate their Messiah, be found in Jesus, and in any other claiming to be that Messiah his being born in Bethlehem, and riding upon an ass into Jerusalem, will by }{\i\f0 no}{\f0 
 means prove him to be so. Besides, those who will take the trouble to look at the context in Zechariah, will find, that the event spoken of in the quotation, is spoken of as }{\i\f0 contemporaneous}{\f0  with }{\i\f0 the restoration Israel,}{\f0 
 and the establishment of peace and happiness, which seems to cut up by the roots the interpretation of the evangelists.  And to conclude the argument, \emdash J
esus being born in Bethlehem, and riding into Jerusalem, allowing it to be true, would not, we think, frustrate these prophecies of }{\i\f0 a future fulfillment}{\f0  \emdash 
for no one can disprove, that if so be the will of God, such a person as the Messiah is described to be, might be born in Bethlehem to-morrow, and ride in triumph into Jerusalem, twenty years afterwards.
\par 
\par The next passage which has been offered, as a prophecy of Jesus, is to be found in the 12th chap. of Zech. v. 10, }{\i\f0 and part of it}{\f0  has been }{\i\f0 misquoted }{\f0 by John. \ldblquote 
And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplications, and they shall look on me whom they have pierced.\rdblquote  So it stands in the English version; but, before I state what it ought to b
e, I would observe, that before the evangelist, (who in his account of the crucifixion applies this passage as referring to Jesus\rquote  being }{\i\f0 pierced}{\f0  with a spear) could make this passage fit his purpose, he had to substitute the word 
\ldblquote him\rdblquote  for  \ldblquote me,\rdblquote  as it is i
n the Hebrew; confirmed by, I believe, all the versions, ancient and modern, without exception. Yet, with this change, it will by no means answer his purpose; for the Hebrew word here translated \ldblquote pierced,\rdblquote  in this place signifies 
\ldblquote blasphemed,\rdblquote  or \ldblquote insulted,\rdblquote  as it is understood by Grotius, who confirms this rendering from the Hebrew of Levit. xxiv. 11, where in this passage \ldblquote 
the Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the Lord.\rdblquote  The Hebrew word translated \ldblquote }{\i\f0 blasphemed\rdblquote }{\f0  is from the same root with the Hebrew word translated }{\i\f0 \ldblquote pierced\rdblquote }{\f0 
 in the passage in Zechariah quoted above. So that the passage ought to be translated thus:\emdash  \ldblquote I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplications, and they shall look }{\i\f0 
towards}{\f0  me whom they have }{\i\f0 blasphemed.\rdblquote  }{\f0  [To \ldblquote look towards God\rdblquote 
 is a phrase frequently met with, and well understood.] Now, to enable us to understand more perfectly this passage, let us consider the context, where we shall find that it states, that the
re was to be a war in Judea, and a siege of Jerusalem, and then a deliverance of the Jews, by the destruction of all the nations, that should come up at that time, against Jerusalem. Immediately after which matters, follows the prophecy under consideratio
n\emdash  \ldblquote  I will pour upon the house of David,\rdblquote  &c. Now, from these things thus laid together, I crave leave to argue in the words of Dr. Sykes [Essay, &c., p. 268]\emdash  \ldblquote Did }{\i\f0 any one circumstance}{\f0 
 of all this happen to the Jews about the time of the death of Jesus ? Or rather, was not every thing }{\i\f0 the reverse}{\f0 
 of what Zechariah says; and instead of all nations being destroyed that came about Jerusalem, Jerusalem itself was destroyed: instead of a spirit of grace and supplications, the Jews have had their hearts hardened
 against the Christ; instead of  mourning for him whom they have pierced, they condemn him and his followers even until this day.\rdblquote   
\par 
\par But it is tiresome thus to waste time in proving that parts and ends of verses, disjointed from their connexion, and even 
the words quoted, some of them changed and some transposed, (though even done according to the rules given by the venerable Surenhusius) prove nothing. We must, therefore, devote the remainder of this long chapter to the consideration of the three famous 
prophecies, on which Christians have not hesitated, with triumphing confidence, to rest the issue of their cause. These are the prophecy of Shiloh, Gen. 49; the 53d ch. of Isaiah; and Daniel\rquote s prophecy of the \ldblquote seventy weeks.\rdblquote 
 I will consider them in order, and thus wind up the chapter.
\par 
\par I have some where read in a catechism, the following question and answer:\emdash Q. \ldblquote How can you }{\i\f0 confound}{\f0  the Jews, and prove, from prophecy, that the Messiah is already come ?\rdblquote  A.  \ldblquote From these two prophecies
\emdash  \lquote The sceptre shall not depart from Judah,\rquote  &c.\emdash Gen. xlix.; and this\emdash  \lquote Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people,\rquote \rdblquote  &c.\emdash Dan. ix. 24.
\par 
\par But, notwithstanding these overwhelming proofs, the stubborn Jews refuse to be confounded! on the contrary, they in fact laugh at Christians for being so easily imposed upon.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 The prophecy concerning Shiloh, the Jews acknowledge, refers to their Messiah.  But they }{\i\f0 do not allow}{\f0  that it }{\i\f0 defines or limits}{\f0  the time of his coming.
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\f0 
\par And that it in fact does not, will be perfectly, evident to all who will look at the place in the Hebrew bible, which they will find pointed to read not \emdash  \ldblquote The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, and a lawgiver from between his feet, }{
\i\f0 until}{\f0  Shiloh come,\rdblquote   &c.; but thus\emdash  \ldblquote The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, for }{\i\f0 ever; for}{\f0  Shiloh }{\i\f0 shall }{\f0 
come, and to him shall the gathering of the people be.\rdblquote   So that the prophecy does not intimate that the Messiah should come before the sceptre be departed from Judah; but that it sh
ould not depart for ever, but shall be restored when Shiloh comes. This is the plain and obvious sense of the prophecy; and, moreover, is the only one that is consistent with historical fact. For, in truth, the sceptre had departed from Judah }{\i\f0 
several hundred years}{\f0  before Jesus of Nazareth was born.  For from the time of the Babylonish captivity \ldblquote Judah\rdblquote  has never been free, but in subjection to the Persians, the Syrians, the Romans, and all the world.
\par 
\par If my readers desire further satisfaction with regard to this interpretation of this famous prophecy, I refer them to the dispute upon this subject between the celebrated Rittangelius, and a learned Jew, (preserved in Wagenseils\rquote    \ldblquote }{
\i\f0 Tela Ignea,\rdblquote )}{\f0  where he will find Rittangelius first amicably inviting the Hebre
w to discuss the point, who does so most ably and respectfully toward his Christian antagonist, and unanswerably establishes the interpretation above stated, by the laws of the Hebrew language, by the ancient interpretation of the Targum, by venerable tra
d
ition, and by appealing to history. Rittangelius begins his defence by shuffling, an ends by getting into a passion, and calling names; which his opponent, who is cool, because confident of being able to establish his argument, answers by notifying to Rit
tangelius his compassion and contempt.
\par 
\par The next prophecy proposed to be considered, is the celebrated prophecy of Isaiah, consisting of part of the 52nd, and the whole of the 53rd, chapter. It is the only prophecy which Paley thinks worth bringing forward 
in his elaborate defence; and it must be confessed, that if this prophecy relates to the Messiah, it is by far the most plausible of any that are brought forward in favour of Jesus Christ. It merits, therefore, a thorough discussion, and I shall endeavour
 that it shall be a candid one. This prophecy is quoted by Jesus himself in Luke xxii. 39, and by Philip, when he converted the Eunuch, (Acts 8,) for  \ldblquote beginning at this prophecy, he preached unto him Jesus.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par It will not be necessary to cite the passage at
 length, it being one perfectly familiar to every Christian.  I will, then, before I consider it, first premise, that since it has been heretofore abundantly made evident, that the Messiah of the Old Testament was not to suffer, and die, but to live and r
e
ign, it is according to the rules of sound criticism, and I think sound theology too, to interpret this solitary passage, so that it may not contradict very many others of a directly contrary import. Now, if this passage can relate only to the Messiah, it
 will throw into utter confusion}{\i\f0  }{\f0 
the whole scheme of the prophetical scriptures. But if it can be made to appear, that it does not necessarily relate to him; if it can, consistently with the context, be otherwise applied, the whole difficulty vanishes. Now,
 the authors of the New Testament have applied this prophecy to the Messiah, and to Jesus as the Messiah; and for doing so, they have been accused of misapplication of it-from the earliest times; since we know from Origen, that the Jews of his time deride
d the Christians for relying upon this prophecy; alleging that it related to their own nation, and was a prophecy of }{\i\f0 their suffering and persecuted state,}{\f0  and of their }{\i\f0 ultimate emancipation}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 happiness.}{\f0 
 And this interpretation of the prophecy the learned Vitringa, in  his commentary upon Is. in loc., allows to be the most respectable he had met with among the Jews, and, according to him, \ldblquote }{\i\f0 to be by no means dispised.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 In order that the fitness or unfitness of this application of the prophecy may be made apparent, and evident, we will new lay before the reader this famous prophecy, part by part, each part accompanied by the Jewish interpretation.
\par 
\par Isaiah lii. 13, \ldblquote Behold, my servant shall prosper, he shall be exalted, }{\i\f0 and}{\f0  extolled, and be very high.\rdblquote  Interpretation\emdash My }{\i\f0 servant Israel,}{\f0 
 though he be in great affliction for a time, yet hereafter shall be released from captivity, and be honoured and raised to elevation very high among the nations of the earth. [That the Jewish nation is spoken of, in the }{\i\f0 singular }{\f0 
number and under the title of }{\i\f0 God\rquote s servant}{\f0  frequently in the Old Testament, is well known, and will be here made certain by a few examples. Isaiah xli. (the chapter preceding the prophecy,)  \ldblquote But thou }{\i\f0 
Israel my servant,}{\f0  thou , }{\i\f0 Jacob,}{\f0  whom I have chosen,\rdblquote  presently afterwards, \ldblquote saying to thee, }{\i\f0 thou}{\f0  art }{\i\f0 my servant.\rdblquote }{\f0  Again, chapter xliv.\emdash   \ldblquote 
Now, therefore, hear Jacob }{\i\f0 my servant,\rdblquote  }{\f0 and so frequently in the same chapter. See also ch. xlv., and Jer. ch. xxx., and Ps. cxxxvi., and Isaiah throughout, for similar examples.]
\par 
\par \ldblquote And many were astonished at thee (his visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men.)\rdblquote  That is\emdash 
 And many were astonished at thee, on account of thy abject state, and miserable condition, being squalid with misery, and suffering more than any men.
\par 
\par \ldblquote So shall he sprinkle many nations, the kings shall shut their mouths at him; for that which had not been told them, shall they see, and that which they had not heard, shall they consider.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Interpretation\emdash  As the Gentil
es wondered at their abject state, so as to make them a proverb of reproach, so shall they admire at their wonderful change of circumstances, from the depth of degradation to the height of prosperity and honour. So that they shall lay their hands upon the
ir mouths, which had beforetime reproached them, when they shall see their felicity to be so far beyond what had been told them, and they shall attentively consider it, and they shall say to each other\emdash 
\par 
\par \ldblquote Who hath believed our report, and the arm of the Lord to whom was it revealed? For he }{\i\f0 grew up}{\f0  [Hebrew, not \ldblquote he }{\i\f0 shall grow}{\f0  up,\rdblquote 
 as in the English version] before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry soil; he had no form nor comeliness ; and when we saw him, there was no beauty that we should desire him.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par The sense is\emdash  The Gentiles shall say to each other in wonder, \ldblquote Who believed what we heard concerning them ? And to whom was the interest the Lord took in them made known ?  For it was }{\i\f0 a}{\f0 
 dispised people, feeble, and wretched, like a tender plant springing up out of a thirsty soil. Their appearance was abject, and there was nothing attractive in their manners.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote He was despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief: and we hid, as it were, our faces from him ; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par That is\emdash  They were despised, and held in abhorrence: they were men of sorrow, and familiar with suffering. We looked upon them with dislike: we hid our faces from them, and esteemed them not.
\par 
\par \ldblquote Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Interpretation\emdash  Surely their sufferings are as great as if they had borne the sins of the whole world ; or, they are, nevertheless, the means appointed to remove the sufferings of an afflicted world, for God hath conne
cted universal happiness with their prosperity; and the end of their sufferings, is the beginning of our joys.
\par 
\par \ldblquote Yet did we esteem him }{\i\f0 smitten of God,}{\f0  and afflicted.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Interpretation\emdash Nevertheless, we considered them as }{\i\f0 a God-abandoned race,}{\f0  and devoted to wretchedness by him, for having crucified their king.
\par 
\par \ldblquote But he was wounded for [or }{\i\f0 by]}{\f0  our transgressions, he was bruised for or }{\i\f0 by]}{\f0  our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and through his stripes we are healed.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par That is\emdash  But, instead of being the victims of God\rquote 
s wrath, they were wounded through our cruelty, they were bruised by our iniquitous treatment, we being suffered to do so, to chastise them for their sins, and to prove their obedience; and this chastisement is that by which our
 peace is to be effected; for their chastisement and probation being finished. God will by them impart and diffuse peace and happiness.
\par 
\par \ldblquote All we like sheep have gone astray, we, have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord hath caused to meet upon him the iniquity of us all.\rdblquote  
\par 
\par But it is we who have sinned more than they: we have all gone astray in our ignorance, being without the knowledge of God, or of his law. Yet the Lord hath permitted us to make them the subjects of our oppressive iniquity.
\par 
\par \ldblquote He was oppressed, [or  \ldblquote exposed to }{\i\f0 pecuniary exactions\rdblquote ]}{\f0 
 and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he was brought as a lamb to the slaughter; and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened, not his mouth. He was taken from prison and from judgment, and who shall declare his generation, [
\ldblquote into his manner of life, who stoopeth to look.?\rdblquote  according to the Hebrew] for he was cut off out of the land of the living; for, [or by] the transgression of my people was he stricken. And he made his grave
 with the wicked; but with the rich were his deaths, [or tomb] because he had done no violence, neither was deceit in his mouth.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Interpretation\emdash How passive and unresisting were they, when oppressed! \emdash They were afflicted, and they complained not; when thr
ough false accusations, and mistaken cruelty they were plundered, and condemned to die, they went like a Iamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so they opened not their mouth. They were taken from the dungeon to be slain, they 
w
ere wantonly massacred, and every man was their foe; and the cause of the sufferers who condescended to examine; for by the thoughtless crimes of my people, they suffered. Yet notwithstanding their graves were appointed with the wicked; yet they were rich
 in their deaths. This did God grant them, because they had not done iniquity.
\par 
\par Rabbi Isaac, author of the famous Munimen Fidei}{\cs16\f0\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super #}{ }{\f0\fs20 There exists an English translation of this work by Abraham de Sola. --D.
\par }}}{\f0 , renders the original \emdash  \ldblquote on account of impieties was he given to his sepulchre, and on account of his riches was his death, because he did no violence, neither was deceit in his mouth\rdblquote  \emdash 
 which he interprets thus :\emdash  We (the former speakers) raised against them false accusations of 
impiety, on account of their religion, and refusing to worship our idols; but their riches was the real cause why we put them to death. Nevertheless, they. used no violence in opposition to our oppressions, neither would they forsake their religion, and d
eceitfully assent to ours in hypocrisy.}{\cs16\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20 The person here spoken of by Isaiah is said to }{\i\f0\fs20 make his grave with the wicked, }{\f0\fs20 
and be with the }{\i\f0\fs20 rich in his death.}{\f0\fs20  Whereas Jesus did exactly the contrary.  He was with the wicked (i. e., the two thieves) in his death
, and with the rich (i.e., Joseph of Arimathea) in his grave, or tomb. In the original, the words may be translated that }{\i\f0\fs20 \ldblquote }{\f0\fs20 he shall avenge, or recompence upon the wicked his grave, and his death upon the rich.\rdblquote 
 Thus does the Targum and the Arabic version interpret the place, and Ezekiel ix. 10, uses the verb in the verse in Isaiah under consideration translated (in The English version)\emdash \ldblquote He made,\rdblquote  &c\emdash 
in the same sense, given to this place in Isaiah, by the Targum, and the Arabic, as said above. See the place in Ezekiel, where it is translated\emdash  \ldblquote I will recompence their way upon their head.\rdblquote 
 See also Deut. xxi. 8, in the original. The Syriac has it\emdash  \ldblquote The wicked contributed to his burial, and the rich to his death.\rdblquote  The Arabic\emdash  \ldblquote I will punish the wicked for his burial, and the rich for his death.
\rdblquote  The Targum\emdash  \ldblquote He shall send the wicked into hell, and the rich who put him to a cruel death.\rdblquote \emdash E.
\par }}}{\f0 
\par 
\par \ldblquote Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him: he hath put him to grief. When thou shalt make his soul a propitiation for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands.\rdblquote 
 [This proves that this prophecy cannot refer to any individual, but may refer to the Jewish nation, because one individual cannot be put to death, and yet \ldblquote see his seed,\rdblquote  and \ldblquote prolong his days.\rdblquote ]  \ldblquote 
After [or on account of] the travail of his soul, seeing he shall be satisfied, by his knowledge shall my righteous servant make many righteous [or show them righteousness,] and he shall bear the burden of their iniquities.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par That is\emdash  After and for their sufferings, they shall be abundantly rewarded; by their superior knowledge of religious truth, shall they make many wise, \ldblquote for many nations shall go, and say, come ye, and let us ascend to the mount of the Lo
rd, and to the house of the God of Jacob, that he may teach us his ways\rdblquote \emdash Mic. iv. ch.
\par 
\par \ldblquote Wherefore, I will give him a portion with the great, and with the mighty shall he divide the spoil, because he poured out his life unto death, and was numbered with the
 transgressors, and himself bear the sin of many, and interceded for the transgressors.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Interpretation\emdash  Therefore, their reward shall be exceeding  great, because for the sake of their duty, they willingly exposed themselves to death, and were accounted 
as transgressors, and bore the cruel afflictions inflicted by many, and made intercession for them who afflicted them.
\par 
\par Such is the explication given by the Jews of this prophecy. I have made no important alterations of the common English translation; except, that in some passages, I have made it more conformable to the original by substituting a verb in }{\i\f0 the past}{
\f0  tense, instead of leaving it }{\i\f0 in the future,}{\f0  as in the English version. Those translators have taken certain liberties in this respect to make this
 prophecy (and several others) more accordant to their own views, which are not supported by the Hebrew: many of these expressions, however, we have left unaltered, as they are quite harmless. But if any of our readers desire further information with rega
rd to the propriety of this interpretation of this prophecy of Isaiah, we refer him to the  \ldblquote }{\i\f0 Munimen Fidei,\rdblquote }{\f0  contained in Wagenseil's  \ldblquote }{\i\f0 Tela Ignea,\rdblquote }{\f0 
 where he will find it amply illustrated, and defended.  Here, in this work, we shall content ourselves with proving, that this prophecy can by no means relate to Jesus, from these circumstances :\emdash 
1. Jesus certainly was not exalted and magnified, and made very great }{\i\f0 upon earth,}{\f0  which, as has been shown, was to be the scene of the exaltation of the Old Testament Messiah; but was put to a cruel and disgraceful death.  2. He was not }{
\i\f0 oppressed by pecuniary exactions,}{\f0  as is said of the subject of this prophecy. 3. He was never }{\i\f0 taken from prison}{\f0  to die, for he was never in one.  4. He did not  \ldblquote see his seed,\rdblquote  nor  \ldblquote 
prolong his days,\rdblquote  since he died childless; and we will not permit the word  \ldblquote seed\rdblquote  to be spiritualized on this occasion, for the word  \ldblquote seed\rdblquote  in the Old Testament, means }{\i\f0 nothing else,}{\f0  than }
{\i\f0 literally  \ldblquote }{\f0 children,\rdblquote  which it is not pretended he ever had; and how could he  \ldblquote prolong his days,\rdblquote  when he was cut off in his 33d year.  5. Besides, who were \ldblquote the strong and mighty,
\rdblquote  with whom he divided the spoil ? Were they the twelve fishermen of Galilee ? and what was the spoi
l divided ? In a word, the literal application of this prophecy to Jesus is now given up by the most learned Hebrew scholars, who allow, that the literal sense of the original can never be understood of him.  [See Priestley\rquote 
s notes on the scriptures, in loco; and the context before and after.]
\par 
\par We have now come to the last subject proposed to be considered in this chapter, viz., Daniel\rquote s prophecy of the seventy weeks, the \ldblquote instar omnium\rdblquote  of the prophetical proofs of Christianity, and which was for ages held up to }{
\i\f0 the}{\f0  view of  \ldblquote the unbelieving race,\rdblquote  as cutting off beyond doubt their \ldblquote hope of Israel\rdblquote 
 from ever appearing, since the time so distinctly foretold had elapsed. But such is the instability of human opinions, that it was at length suspected, and at last ascertained-by the learned, that \ldblquote the stubborn Israelites\rdblquote 
 had some reason for denying that prophecy, any voice in the affair. 
\par 
\par During many years, one learned man after another, had amused himself with destroying the system of his predecessor, and repl
acing it with his own, not a whit better, but tending to the same end, viz., to make the prophecy of the seventy weeks tally and fit with the event of }{\i\f0 the crucifixion.}{\f0 
  At length Marsham, a learned Englishman, declared, and demonstrated, that his predecess
ors, in this enquiry, had been grossly mistaken, for that the prophecy .in all its parts was totally irrelevant and irreconcileable  with the time of the crucifixion. The appearance of his book put all the theologians of that age in an uproar! But many le
arned Christians in the last, and present, century, now freely acknowledge, that Daniel is not on their side, but as much a Jew as his brethren. 
\par   
\par This celebrated prophecy, literally translated from the original, is as follows:\emdash  Dan. }{\i\f0 ix.}{\f0  24, &c.\emdash   \ldblquote Sevent
y weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal the vision and prophecy, and to anoint
 
the most Holy, [i. e., the sanctum sanctorum, or Holy of Holies.] Know, therefore, and understand, that from the going forth of the word to restore and build Jerusalem, unto the anointed prince, shall be seven weeks; and (in) threescore and two weeks, the
 street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times. And after threescore and two weeks shall the anointed (one) be cut off, and be without a successor; (Heb. \ldblquote and not, or none to him\rdblquote 
) and the city and the sanctuary shall be destroyed}{\cs16\f0\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super #}{ }{\f0\fs20 Or, shall destroy.\emdash D.
\par }}}{\f0  by the people of the prince that shall come ; and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the war desolations are determined. And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week, and half the week (i. e., in the
 midst of the week) he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation and that (is) determined, be poured upon the desolate?\rdblquote 
\par 
\par This is the prophecy on which such stress has been laid, as pointing out the }{\i\f0 precise time}{\f0 
 of the coming of the Messiah; and I shall fully demonstrate that it hath not the most distant reference to that event. And for the better explanation of the prophecy, it is proper that we attend a little to the context.
\par 
\par }{\cs16\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20 The remainder of this chapter is taken from L}{\i\f0\fs20 evi}{\f0\fs20  and }{\i\f0\fs20 Wagenseil.\emdash }{\f0\fs20 E.
\par }}}{\f0 In the preceding chapter of Daniel it is said, that when Daniel was informed of the vision of the two thousand and three hundred days, he sought for the mea
ning; but not rightly understanding it, he judged, that that great number was a contradiction to the word of God as delivered by Jeremiah, concerning the redemption at the end of seventy years; (Jer. xxv. 11, 12, and ch. xxix. 10) and from thence he concl
uded that the captivity was prolonged on account of the sins of the nation. This doubt arose from his  not understanding the prophecy, and, therefore, the angel said unto him,\emdash  \ldblquote I am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding.
\rdblquote  And he proceeds to inform him, that as soon as he began to pray, and God saw, his perplexity, the royal command went forth from him, that he should come to Daniel to }{\i\f0 make}{\f0 
 him understand the truth of those matters, that were to come to pass in future time. And as the angel Gab
riel had explained to him the vision from whence his doubt arose, it was incumbent on him to perfect the explanation; and that is what is meant by the expression }{\i\f0 \ldblquote to show,\rdblquote  i.}{\f0 
 e., as I began the explanation, the commandment was, that I should finish it.
\par 
\par Before I proceed to give the Jewish explanation of the prophecy, it is proper to show in what manner the answer of the angel in it, agreed to Daniel\rquote 
s question, and also the reason of his using the term weeks, and not years, or times, as in the other visions.
\par 
\par It appears, that Daniel, from the words of Jeremiah, perceived that God. would visit all the nations, and punish them for their sins, as may be observed from the following words:\emdash  \ldblquote 
Thus saith the Lord God of Israel unto me, Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause all the nations to whom I send thee, to drink it\rdblquote \emdash 
Jer, xxv. 15. He then mentions first Jerusalem, afterwards the king of Egypt, Tyre, Sidon, and all the Isles beyond the sea, and many others; and at last the king of Sheshak, or Babylon.
\par 
\par He also further perceived, that the visitation of each nation would be at the end of seventy years, as Isaiah observes of Tyre:  \ldblquote And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be forgotten }{\i\f0 seventy years.\rdblquote }{\f0 
 Isaiah xxiii. I5, the same of Babylon: \ldblquote And it shall come to pass, when }{\i\f0 seventy years}{\f0  are accomplished, I will punish the King of Babylon.\rdblquote  Jer. xxv. 12, And as it is observed in the next verse:  \ldblquote 
All that is written in this book which Jeremiah hath prophecied, against }{\i\f0 all the nations.\rdblquote }{\f0  Fr
om whence it appears, that as the visitation of Babylon was to be seventy years, so was that of the other nations to be; for so had the wisdom of God decreed to wait according to this number.  For which reason, and because the prophets say that the restor
a
tion of Israel is to be contemporaneous with the destruction of their enemies, Daniel appears to have. judged, that the sins of his nation would be done away by the seventy years of the captivity of Babylon; and, therefore, the angel informed him of his e
r
ror, by telling him, that this was not to be the case with his nation, for that their wickedness was come up before God, and their sin was very grievous; and that, therefore, their sins would not be atoned for by seventy years, as in the case of the rest 
of the nations, to whom he allowed seventy years }{\i\f0 to see if they would repent;}{\f0  and, if not, then  he would punish them. But as for Israel, he would not only wait seventy }{\i\f0 years, but seven times seventy years;}{\f0 
 (for thus it is literally, in the Hebrew, the words translated \ldblquote seventy weeks,\rdblquote  are, literally,  \ldblquote }{\i\f0 seventy sevens\rdblquote )}{\f0 
 after which, if they had not repented and reformed, their kingdom should be cut off, and they return into captivity, to finish an atonement for their transgressions. Hence the }{\i\f0 cause}{\f0  of Daniel's }{\i\f0 question}{\f0  is evident; and the }{
\i\f0 propriety }{\f0 of the angel\rquote s }{\i\f0 answer}{\f0  to the question, is manifest; as also the expression of weeks or sevens.
\par 
\par These seventy weeks are, without doubt, four }{\i\f0 hundred and ninety years, }{\f0 the time elapsed from the destruction of the first temple, till the destruction of the second.  
\par 
\par This, it seems, was the more necessary for the angel to inform him of; because Daniel judged, that after their return from Babylon, by means of that visitation only, all their sins would be done away. For 
which reason the angel showed him that it would not be so, [for the return from Babylon was not }{\i\f0 a perfect redemption,}{\f0  because there was not a }{\i\f0 general}{\f0 
 collection of all that were in captivity, even all the tribes, save only a few of Judah and Benjamin, and 
those not the most respectable. And after their return, they were not free, but were under the dominion of the Persians, Greeks and Romans. And although they, at one time, threw off their yoke, and had kings of the Asmonean and Herodean families, yet was 
t
here no king among them of the seed of David, neither had they the Shechinah, nor the Urim and Thummim, all which is a manifestation that it was not a perfect redemption, but only a visitation, with which God was pleased to visit them; so that they were a
llowed to build a temple to the Lord, by the permission of Cyrus, and according to the measure given by him. This was that they might be the better enabled to do the works of repentance during the time allowed, and thus \ldblquote 
make atonement, and thus finish the transgression, and make an end of sins, and make reconciliation for iniquity;\rdblquote  and thus, at the end of the time assigned, even  \ldblquote seventy weeks,\rdblquote  they would bring in \ldblquote 
everlasting righteousness,\rdblquote  i.e., universal virtue and felicity, throughout the world, whe
n the Eternal should be known, worshipped, and obeyed by all mankind. But if they did not repent, and amend, if they did evil, as their fathers, then their kingdom was to be cut off at the expiration of the seventy weeks; which, in fact, took place.]

\par 
\par After the angel had thus expressed himself in general terms, he descended to particulars; and laid down }{\i\f0 three propositions}{\f0  (if I may be allowed the term,) or }{\i\f0 periods.
\par 
\par }{\f0 First.  \ldblquote Know, therefore, and understand, (that) from the going  forth of the word to restore and build Jerusalem, unto }{\i\f0 the anointed prince, (shall }{\f0 be) seven weeks.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par That is, it shall be seven weeks or forty nine years from the destruction of the first temple, to Cyrus, \ldblquote the anointed prince,\rdblquote  who shall give leave to build the second.  [With regard to the import of the phrase  \ldblquote 
the going forth of the word,\rdblquote  I refer the reader to Levi's Letters to Priestley, and shall here only concern myself with settling the meaning of the expression of  \ldblquote the anointed prince.\rdblquote ] Many Christians have objected to th
e term Messiah, or anointed, being applied, as in our interpretation to Cyrus a heathen prince; and they apply it themselves to Jesus of Nazareth. But that the term, or appellation, Messiah, can be applied to Cyrus, is evident; since }{\i\f0 
we find it so applied}{\f0  by God himself in the xlv. ch. of Isaiah.  \ldblquote Thus saith the Lord to his }{\i\f0 anointed, to Cyrus. 2.}{\f0  It is a singular fact, that the appellation \ldblquote Messiah\rdblquote  is }{\i\f0 never}{\f0 
 applied to the expected deliverer of the Israelites in the whole bible, except, }{\i\f0 perhaps,}{\f0  in ii. Psalm. It is an appellation indifferently applied to }{\i\f0 kings,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 priests,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 prophets;}{\f0 
 to all who were anointed, as an induction into their office, and has nothing in it peculiar and exclusive; but the application of it to the expected deliverer of Israel, or
iginated in and from the Targums.  3. In order to make this prophecy, and this phrase,  \ldblquote Messiah the prince,\rdblquote  or  \ldblquote the anointed prince,\rdblquote 
 apply to Jesus of Nazareth, Christians connect, and join together, this first member of the prophecy with the second, in open defiance of the original Hebrew; and after all, they can reap no benefit from this manoeuvre; for the term  \ldblquote }{\i\f0 
Messiah Nagid,\rdblquote }{\f0  or  \ldblquote the anointed prince,\rdblquote  can never apply to Jesus, in this place, at any rate; because he certainly was no prince or \ldblquote }{\i\f0 Nagid,\rdblquote }{\f0  a word which in the Hebrew bible }{\i\f0 
always, without exception,}{\f0  denotes a prince, or ruler, one invested with }{\i\f0 temporal}{\f0  authority, or supreme command. Now, as it is allowed on all hands, that Jesus had no such temporal power, as a prince, or ruler; it, 
consequently, follows, that he can by no means be the  \ldblquote anointed prince\rdblquote  mentioned in the prophecy.
\par 
\par Second Period.  \ldblquote And (in) threescore and two weeks, the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times,\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Here the angel gave him to un
derstand, that after the seven weeks before mentioned, there would come a time in which the building would be hindered, (and which was on account of the letter written by Rheum and Shimshai to Artaxerxes, who, in consequence thereof, made the building to 
cease-  See Ezra and Nehemiah) till the second year of Darius, who gave leave to finish the building: which continued till the destruction by the Romans, }{\i\f0 sixty-two weeks,}{\f0  beside the }{\i\f0 last week,}{\f0  at the }{\i\f0 beginning of}{\f0 
 which, the Romans came, and warred against t
hem, and at length entirely destroyed the cities of Judah, Jerusalem, and the temple. For, from the time that Cyrus first gave leave to build the temple, till its completion, was twenty-one years; and its duration, four hundred and twenty; in the whole, s
ixty-three weeks, or four hundred and forty one years.  But the angel made his division at sixty-two weeks, as he afterwards described what was to come to pass in the last week (and with reason, for the horrible Jewish war lasted }{\i\f0 seven years!)}{
\f0  And by the words, \ldblquote in troublous times,\rdblquote 
 he informed Daniel, that during the building of the temple, they would have continual trouble and alarms from their enemies, as is mentioned in Ezra and Nehemiah, where we find, that while some worked, the others held the shield 
and spear. And even after finishing it, they were almost continually in trouble, and persecuted, as is evident from the books of Maccabees, and from Josephus.
\par 
\par Third Period.  \ldblquote And after threescore and two weeks shall the anointed be cut off, and have no successor\emdash [Heb. \ldblquote and not, or, none, to him\rdblquote ]\emdash 
 and the city and the sanctuary shall be destroyed by the people of the prince that shall come; and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the war desolations are determined.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par That is, and after that period, shall the High Priest (or  \ldblquote the anointed one\rdblquote ) be cut off\emdash [The High Priest is called  \ldblquote Messiah,\rdblquote  witness Lev. iv. 3 \emdash  \ldblquote 
If the Messiah Priest, (or anointed priest) doth sin,\rdblquote  &c.]\emdash and have no successor; and the city and the temple shall be d
estroyed by Titus and the Romans, and until the end of the war, your country shall be swept with the besom of destruction.
\par 
\par The angel finishes the prophecy with these words:\emdash  \ldblquote And he (the prince that shall come) shall strengthen the. covenant with many, fo
r one week. And in the midst of the week (i. e., the seventieth and last week,) he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par This prediction was fully accomplished; for 1. Titus, \ldblquote the prince that should come,\rdblquote  was continually offering peace to the Jews, and tried to \ldblquote strengthen the covenant\rdblquote \emdash 
i. e., their old treaties made with the Romans, and in fact did bring over many. 2. On account of the distress of the siege, the daily sacrifice did in fact cease to be offered in the temple some time befor
e its destruction; and the angel further observes, that all this was to come upon them for their sins,  \ldblquote for the overspreading of abominations, it should be made desolate.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par This is what appears to be a plain and fair explication of this prophecy; but sinc
e Christians, seeing mention made in it of a Messiah to be cut off, have eagerly endeavoured to press it into their service, it remains for me to show, that it is impossible to make this prophecy refer to \ldblquote the cutting off\rdblquote  of Jesus. 

\par 
\par The difficulty th
at learned Christians have met with, in their attempts to do this, will be easily conceived by any person, when he knows, that more than a dozen different hypotheses have been framed by them for that purpose; but that they have lost their labour, will be 
obvious from this single observation, that  \ldblquote the anointed one, or Messiah,\rdblquote  who, the prophet says, was to be  \ldblquote cut off,\rdblquote  was to be cut off  \ldblquote AFTER the threescore and two weeks,\rdblquote  i. e., }{\i\f0 
at the destruction of Jerusalem, or within the seven years preceding that event!}{\f0  Now, we know from the Evangelists, and; from profane history, that Jesus was crucified }{\i\f0 more than forty years before}{\f0 
 the destruction of Jerusalem. In addition to this, nothing need be said, for this circumstance lays flat their interpretation at one stroke.
\par 
\par Those who desire to see a more elaborate discussion of this prophecy, and an ample defence of this interpretation, are referred to  \ldblquote Levi\rquote s Letters, to Priestly;\rdblquote 
 and those who are desirous of seeing an account of the various, contradictory, perplexed and multitudinous contrivances, by which it has been endeavoured to apply this prophecy to Jesus, are referred to Prideaux, Michaelis, and Blayney.
\par 
\par We have now gone through an examination of the evidence adduced from the prophets of the Old Testame
nt, to prove that Jesus is the Messiah of the Old Testament; and those of our readers who love truth, are, we trust, now made sensible that the religion of the New Testament, }{\i\f0 if built upon such proofs as these,}{\f0  is, evidently, founded on
\emdash  a mistake.
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs28 CHAPTER VIII.
\par }{\f0 
\par STATEMENT OF ARGUMENTS WHICH PROVE THAT JESUS WAS NOT THE MESSIAH OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.
\par 
\par Most of our readers have, no doubt, heard from the pulpit, }{\i\f0 many }{\f0 exclamations and declamations against the \ldblquote blindness of the Jews,\rdblquote  in not recognizing their Messiah in Jesus of Nazareth.  The reasons of this \ldblquote 
blindness\rdblquote  are made, I think, by this time pretty intelligible.
\par 
\par Nevertheless, for the further satisfaction of the reader, I will here set down the principal reasons given by Rabbi Isaac, in his \ldblquote Munimen Fidei,\rdblquote  which cause the Jews to deny the Messiahship of Jesus.
\par 
\par \ldblquote At a certain time, (says he,) a certain learned man of the wise men of the Christians said unto me:\emdash   \lquote Wherefore are you Jews unwilling to believe Jesus of Nazareth to be the Messiah, when yet 
your veritable prophets testified of him, whose words you profess to have faith in.\rquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  I gave him this answer. }{\i\f0  \lquote }{\f0 How, I require, could we believe him to be the Messiah, when you can produce no genuine proof from the prophets in his favour, since all those
 things adduced by the evangelists from them, to prove Jesus the Messiah, are nothing to the purpose ? And we have many and evident reasons to prove that he was not the Messiah. And of these, I will bring forward a few, arising, 1, From his }{\i\f0 
genealogy.}{\f0  2. From his }{\i\f0 works.}{\f0  3. From }{\i\f0 the time}{\f0  of his appearing. 4. From the prophecies of the things to take place in the time of the Messiah }{\i\f0 not having seen fulfilled  in his }{\f0 
age. And in these things are contained the genuine marks characteristic of our Messiah.\rquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote 1. As to what concerns his genealogy; it does }{\i\f0 not prove}{\f0 
 this necessary thing, that Jesus was the son of David, because he was not begotten by Joseph, as the Gospel of Matthew testifies; for in the first chapter of it, it is written, that Jesus was born of Mar
y when she was yet a virgin, and had not been known by Joseph; which things being so, the genealogy of Joseph has nothing to do with Jesus. The descent and origin of Mary, is still less known, but it seems from Luke\rquote 
s calling Elizabeth, who was of Levi, her cousin, that Mary was of the tribe of }{\i\f0 Levi,}{\f0  and not of }{\i\f0 Judah,}{\f0 
 and, consequently, not of David; and, if she were, still Jesus is not the more the son of David; descents being reckoned from the }{\i\f0 males only.}{\f0  Neither is the}{\i\f0  }{\f0 genealogy of Joseph rightly deduced
 from David, but labours under great difficulties. Matthew, and Luke also, not only disagree, }{\i\f0 but irreconcilably and flatly contradict}{\f0  each other, in their genealogies of Joseph.  }{\i\f0 Now,}{\f0 
 it cannot be that the testimony of two witnesses, who directly contradict each other in }{\i\f0 the matter to be proved by them,}{\f0  can be received as true. But the prophets have directed us to expect no Messiah but one born of the seed of David.

\par 
\par \ldblquote  2. As to the }{\i\f0 works}{\f0  of Jesus, we object to what he said concerning himself:\emdash  \lquote Do not cons
ider me as come to establish peace on earth, for I have come to send a sword, and to separate the son from the father, and the daughter from her mother, and the daughter-in-law from her mother-in-law,\rquote 
 which words are written in Mat. ch. x. But we find the
 prophecies concerning the Messiah to attribute to him very different works from these; nay, the very opposite. For, whereas Jesus testifies concerning himself, that he did not come to establish peace in the earth, but \lquote division,\rquote  \lquote 
fire\rquote  and \lquote sword,\rquote  Zechariah says, concerning the expected Messiah, ch. ix.:\emdash \lquote He shall speak }{\i\f0 peace}{\f0  to the nations.\rquote  Jesus says he came to send \lquote fire and sword\rquote 
 upon the earth, but Micah says, ch. ii., that in the times of the true Messiah they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks, nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.
\rquote  Jesus says that he came \lquote to put division between the father and the son,\rquote  &c. But in the time of the true Messiah, Elias, the prophet, shall come, of whom Malachi prophecied \lquote 
that he shall convert the heart of the fathers unto the children, and the heart of the children to the fathers.\rquote  Jesus says \lquote that he came to serve others, not to be served by }{\i\f0 them\rquote  \endash  Mat. xx. 29.}{\f0  But of the
 true Messiah it is said, Psalm lxxii.:\emdash  \lquote All kings shall bow themselves before him, all nations shall serve him.\rquote  The same also is said by Zechariah, ch. ix. :\emdash  \lquote 
His dominion shall be, from one sea to the other, and from the river unto the ends of the earth;\rquote  and so Dan., ch. vii.:\emdash  \lquote All dominions shall serve and obey him.\rquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote 3. As to the }{\i\f0 time,}{\f0  we object to the Christians, that Jesus did }{\i\f0 not}{\f0  come at the time designated by the prophets; for the prophets testify, that the coming of the Messiah should be  \lquote }{\i\f0 in the end of days
\rquote }{\f0  or, in}{\i\f0  the latter days, }{\f0 (which, surely, have not yet arrived) as it is in Isaiah ch. ii. :\emdash  \lquote It shall come to pass }{\i\f0 in the latter days,}{\f0  that the mountain of the Lord\rquote 
s house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and all nations shall flow unto it;\rquote  and it immediately follows, concerning the king Messiah, \lquote 
that he shall judge among the nations, and rebuke many peoples, and they shall beat their words into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks.\rquote  See also Hosea, ch. iii, and also Dan., ch. ii., where it is written :\emdash  \lquote 
God hath made known unto king Nebuchadnezzar what shall come to pass in the latter days,\rquote  (or, in the end of days.) And this pertains to what follows, viz., to this:\emdash  \lquote In the days of those kings, (i. e., of
 the kingdoms that arose out of the ruins of the Roman Empire) the God of heaven will raise up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed.\rquote 
 Thus you see, that the prophets predicted, that the kingdom of the Messiah should be after the destruction of the Roman Empire, not while it was in its vigour; when Jesus came; in \lquote the latter days,\rquote  and not before.}{\cs16\f0\super *
{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20 The reader is requested to consider the reasoning in the last paragraph. The prophecy in the second chapter of Daniel, is commonly supposed to relate to the
 four Great Empires, the Babylonian, Persian, Grecian and Roman. This last, it is (according to this interpretation,) foretold, should be }{\i\f0\fs20 divided into many kingdoms, }{\f0\fs20 and that \lquote in the latter days of these kingdoms,\rquote 
 (which are now subsisting) God would set up a kingdom which would never be destroyed,\emdash that of the Messiah. Of course, according to this interpretation, the kingdom of the Messiah was not to be not only }{\i\f0\fs20 sustain after}{\f0\fs20 
 the destruction of the Roman Empire, but not till the latter days of the kingdoms
 which grew up out of its ruins; whereas, Jesus was born in the time of Augustus, i. e., precisely when the Roman Empire itself was in the highest of its splendour and vigour. This is a remarkable, and very striking, repugnance, to the claims of the New T
estament, and, if substantiated, must overset them entirely.\emdash E.
\par }}}{\f0 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  4. Besides all these difficulties, neither were the promises made to us by the prophets, concerning the things to come to pass at the coming of the Messiah, fulfilled in the time of Jesus. For examples, take the following:\emdash  \lquote 
1. In the time of the king Messiah, there was to be one kingdom only, and one only king upon earth, viz., the king Messiah\emdash see Daniel, ch. ii.; but behold, we see with our eyes, many independent kingdoms, distinct, and 
distinguished by different laws and customs, religious and political, which things being so, it follows, that the Messiah is not yet come.
\par 
\par \ldblquote  2. In the time of the king Messiah, there was to be only }{\i\f0 one religion }{\f0 and }{\i\f0 one law}{\f0  throughout the world; for, it is written in Isaiah, ch. lii. and lxvi., that }{\i\f0 all nations}{\f0 
 shall come at stated times to worship the Eternal at Jerusalem. See also Zechariah, ch. xiv. and ch. viii., and indeed throughout the writings of the prophets.
\par 
\par \ldblquote 3. In the time of the king Messiah, idols were to be cut off, and utterly to perish from the earth; as it is said in Zechariah, ch. xiii., and so in Isaiah, ch. ii., it is written, \lquote And the glory of idols shall utterly pass away;\rquote 
 and so in Zephaniah, ch. ii.,  \lquote The Lord shall be terrible among them, when he shall make lean (i. e., bring to nothing) all the gods of the earth; and all the countries of the nations shall bow themselves to Him, each out of his place.\rquote 

\par 
\par \ldblquote 4. In the times of the Messiah, there shall o
btain no more sins and crimes in the earth, especially among the children of Israel, as is affirmed in Deut. xxx.,  Zephaniah, ch. iii and in Jeremiah, ch. iii. And l., and so in Ezekiel, ch. xxxvi. and xxxvii. 
\par 
\par \ldblquote 5. In the times of the Messiah, there shall be peace between man and beast, and between the tiger and the tame beast; and the little child shall stroke, with impunity, the variegated skin of the serpent, and,\emdash 
 as one of our own poets has beautifully said,\emdash   \lquote and with his forked tongue shall innocently play.\rquote   See in Isaiah, ch. xi. and lxv., the original from whence he derived his beautiful poem.
\par 
\par \ldblquote 6. In the time of the king Messiah, there are to be no calamities, no afflictions, no lamentations throughout the world. But the inhabitants thereof are
 to lead joyful lives in gratitude to the good God, and in the enjoyment of his bounties. See Isaiah lxv. 
\par 
\par \ldblquote }{\i\f0 Lastly.}{\f0  In the time of the king Messiah, the glory of God was again to return to Israel, and the spirit of the most High God was to be liberally po
ured out upon them, and they were to be endowed with the spirit of prophecy, and with wisdom, and knowledge, and understanding, and virtue; and God will no more hide his face from them; but will bless them, and give them a ready heart and a willing mind t
o obey his laws, and enjoy the felicities consequent thereupon. And the }{\i\f0 Shechinah}{\f0  shall inhabit the temple }{\i\f0 for ever,}{\f0  and the glory of God shall never depart from Israel; but they shall walk amid the splendours of t
he glory of the Eternal, and all the earth shall resound with his praise, as is written in Ezekiel, ch. xxxvii., and xxxix., and xliii.; and in Joel, ch. ii., and in Zech., ch. ii., and Isaiah, ch. xi., and throughout the latter part of his prophecies, an
d in Jer. xxxi.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par And now, reader, let me ask you this question, has }{\i\f0 any one}{\f0  of the foregoing prophecies been yet fulfilled, either in the days of Jesus, or }{\i\f0 ever since ? }{\f0 
Thou canst not say it! Now, then, hear the conclusion, which, in sincerity, and with the hand upon the heart, I am compelled to draw from these precedents.  \ldblquote 
Since these distinctive characteristics predicted by the Hebrew prophets, as to be found in their Messiah, were certainly, and evidently, never found in }{\i\f0 Jesus;}{\f0  and since these condition
s and circumstances, and many others beside, which, to avoid prolixity, have been omitted, most assuredly did not take place in the time of Jesus, nor ever since, and since they were according to those prophets, certainly to be expected in the time of the
ir Messiah; therefore, }{\i\f0 from}{\f0  all this, it seems to be demonstrable (allowing the prophets to be true,) that Jesus of Nazareth was not this true Messiah.\rdblquote 
 And I would ask the candid Christian, in which link of this chain of proofs he can find a flaw? And I wo
uld ask him, too, as a moral and honest man, whether any Jew, in his right mind, could, without setting at nought what he conceived to be the word of God, receive him }{\i\f0 as}{\f0 
 the Messiah ? The honest and upright answer, I believe, will be, that he could net. And, accordingly, it is very well known, that the Jewish nation have never done so. And this their }{\i\f0 obstinacy,}{\f0 
 as it is called, will not by this time, I think, appear }{\i\f0 unreasonable}{\f0  to any sensible man; and he will now be able to appreciate .the justice of that idle cant about  \ldblquote the carnal Jews,\rdblquote  and their \ldblquote worldly-minded
\rdblquote  expectation of a temporal prince, as their Messiah. Certainly, the Jews had very good reason, from their prophecies, to expect no Messiah but a Messiah who should sit on the throne of David, a
nd confer liberty and happiness upon them, and spread peace and happiness throughout the earth, and communicate the knowledge of God, and virtue, and the love of their fellow-men to every people. Whether this (carnal or not,) would have been better than a
 
spiritual kingdom, and a throne in heaven; together with the ample list of councils, dogmas, excommunications, proscriptions, theological quarrels, and frauds, and an endless detail of blood and murder, I leave to the judgment of those capable of deciding
 for themselves.
\par 
\par Neither, in fact, is it true, that the Jews were so  \ldblquote carnally minded\rdblquote  as to refuse Jesus as their Messiah, because he was poor and in a low estate. On the contrary, did they not ask him not to evade, but to speak plainly ? \ldblquote 
How long (said they) dost thou mean to keep us in suspense ? If thou be the Messiah, tell us plainly.\rdblquote 
 These very men were willing to hazard, in his favour, their fortunes, their families, and their lives, in his cause, against the whole power of the Roman empire. Nay, 
so urgent were they, that they were going to make him their king by force, and he concealed himself from the honour. The evasions he used to avoid their pressing questions upon the subject, are known to all who have read the evangelists ; and so timed was
 he in acknowledging himself as the Messiah, that he did not do so, till Simon Peter told him that he was. And can any candid man, after all this, wonder at, or condemn,  \ldblquote the blindness,\rdblquote 
 as it is called, of the Jews ? or can he refrain from smiling at the frothy declamations in which divines load that nation with so much unmerited reproach ? These Jews had just reason, we think, to doubt his Messiahship; and they had }{\i\f0 a right}{
\f0  to satisfactory and }{\i\f0 unambiguous}{\f0  proof of his being so: even the proofs }{\i\f0 laid down, by their prophets. }{\f0 
 And this, it must be now acknowledged, they wanted; and, certainly, the wise and learned of the Jewish nation, might be allowed to have understood their sacred books upon the subject, as well, at least, if not better, than the illiterate
 apostles, who manifestly put new interpretations upon them, and those, confessedly, not agreeable to the obvious and literal meaning of those books ; but contrary to the sense of the Jewish nation. And for this scepticism they might plead the example of 
the apostles themselves, who, }{\i\f0 at first,}{\f0 
 like other unbelieving Jews, expected a temporal prince; and did disbelieve Jesus to be the Messiah on account of his death, notwithstanding his miracles. And they continued in these thoughts, till it seems they come 
to understand the spiritual sense of the scriptures; which spiritual sense, it is said, they obtained by  \ldblquote the traditionary rules of interpretation in use among the Jews.\rdblquote 
 Yet, it is rather inconsistent and singular, that they should place so much dependence upon these traditionary rules, and yet pay so little regard to the traditionary explication of the scriptures, with respect to the temporal kingdom of the Messiah
\emdash inconsistent and singular is it, that they should "cry aloud" for that which would support their peculiar views, but reject it when militating against these views.}{\cs16\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {
\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20 The sum of our argument may be expressed thus. God is represented in the prophecies of the Old Testament as designing to send into the world an eminent deliverer, descended from Da
vid, the peace and prosperity of whose reign should far exceed  all that went before him, in whom all the glorious things foretold by the prophets should receive their entire completion; and who should be distinguished by the character of the Messiah or C
hrist. This is an article of faith common to}{\i\f0\fs20  }{\f0\fs20 
Christians and Jews. But that Jesus of Nazareth should be esteemed this Messiah, and that Christians can support that opinion, by alledging the prophecies of the Hebrew scriptures as belonging to, and fulfilled i
n, him, is what we can by no means allow, and that especially on account of these inconsistencies. 
\par }{\i\f0\fs20 
\par }{\f0\fs20 1. Because, these prophecies, acknowledged on both sides to point out the Messiah, could not otherwise }{\i\f0\fs20 answer the end}{\f0\fs20  of inspiring them }{\i\f0\fs20 than by an accomplishment so plain and sensible }{\f0\fs20 
 as might sufficiently }{\i\f0\fs20 distinguish}{\f0\fs20  the person meant by them }{\i\f0\fs20 to be that Messiah.}{\f0\fs20  But no such accomplishment, we contend, can possibly be discerned in }{\i\f0\fs20 Jesus,}{\f0\fs20 
 and, consequently, he cannot be the person meant by them.
\par 
\par 2. Because, 
several predictions which Christians apply to Jesus, are wrested to a meaning which quite destroys the historical sense of scripture, and breaks the connexion of the passages from whence they are taken. Thus many shreds and loose sentences are culled out 
for this purpose, which do not appear to have any relation to Jesus, or to the Messiah either ; but to have received their proper and intended completion in some other person, whom the prophet, as is manifest, had then only in view.
\par 
\par 3. Because, in their fo
rced applications of the prophecies, Christians, finding themselves hard pressed by the simple and natural construction, forsake the literal, and take shelter in spiritual and mystical senses; fly to hyperboles and strained metaphors, and thus expound the
 
true meaning and importance of the prophecies quite away; the intent whereof being to instruct men in so necessary a point of faith as that relating to the Messiah, it is reasonable to think they would be delivered in the most perspicuous and intelligible
 
terms. Since ambiguous expressions (capable of such strange meanings as they pretend,) would be too slippery a foundation to build such a point of faith upon; would be of no use, or worse than none; would be unable to teach the clear truth, and apt to ens
nare men into dangerous errors, by leaving too great a latitude for fanciful interpretations, and introducing darkness and confusion, and contradiction inexplicable.
\par 
\par 4. Because, admitting (as indeed it never was, or can be denied) that many passages of scripture, and of prophetical scripture especially, must be figuratively taken; yet, we must always put a wide difference between a sense }{\i\f0\fs20 not just as}{
\f0\fs20  the words in their first signification import, and a sense }{\i\f0\fs20 directly the contrary}{\f0\fs20  of what they import. And yet
 we complain that this latter is the sense which Christians labour to obtrude upon the gainsayers. We say, that a kingdom of this world, .and not of this world; contempt and adoration; poverty and magnificence; persecution and peace; sufferings and triump
h; a cross and a throne ; the scandalous death of a private man upon a gibbet, and the everlasting dominion of a universal monarch, must be }{\i\f0\fs20 reconciled, and}{\f0\fs20  mean }{\i\f0\fs20 the self same thing,}{\f0\fs20 
 before the prophecies appealed to, can do their cause any service.  Grantin
g, then, the goodness of God (according to them,) to have been better than his word, by giving spiritual blessings, instead of temporal; yet, what will become of the truth of God, if He act contrary to his word, even when it would be for our advantage, if
 He misleads people by expressions, which, if they mean any thing at all, must mean what the Jews understand by them ?
\par 
\par In short, it seems to me, that if Providence has, in truth, any concern with the predictions of the Old Testament, it could not have take
n more effectual care to justify the unbelief and obstinacy of the Jews, than by ordering matters so, that the life and death of Jesus should be so }{\i\f0\fs20 exactly,}{\f0\fs20  and so }{\i\f0\fs20 entirely,}{\f0\fs20  the }{\i\f0\fs20 very reverse}{
\f0\fs20  of all those ideas under which their prophets had constantly desc
ribed, and the Hebrew nation as constantly expected of their Messiah, and his coming; and to suppose that the Supreme Being meant to describe and point out such a person as Jesus by such descriptions of the Messiah as are contained in the Old Testament, i
s certainly substantially to accuse him of the moat unjustifiable prevarication, and mockery of his creatures.
\par 
\par In order that the subject we are examining, and the arguments we make use of, may be clearly understood by the reader, he is requested to bear in
 mind, that the author reasons all along upon the supposed Divine authority of the Old Testament; which is admitted by both Jews and Christians. Whether the supernatural claims of the Old Testament be just, or not, is of no consequence in the world to the
 controversy we are considering. For the dispute of the Jew with the }{\i\f0\fs20 Christian}{\f0\fs20  is one thing, and his dispute with the }{\i\f0\fs20 sceptic}{\f0\fs20 
 is another, totally different. For whether such a personage as the Messiah is described to be, has appeared eighteen hundred years 
ago, is quite a different thing from the question, whether such a personage will appear at all. The Christian says, that he has appeared in the person of Jesus of Nazareth. This the Jew denies, but looks forward to the future fulfilment of the promises of
 his Bible, while the Sceptic denies that the Messiah has come, or ever will.
\par 
\par But the subject at present under consideration is the dispute of the Jew with the Christian, who acknowledges the Old Testament to be a Revelation, upon which a new Revelation, t
hat of the New Testament, is founded and erected. To him the Jew argues, that if the Old Testament be a Divine Revelation, then the New Testament cannot be a Revelation, because it contradicts, and is repugnant to, the Old Testament, the more ancient, and
 
acknowledged Revelation. Now God cannot be the author of two Revelations, one of which is repugnant to the other. One of them is certainly false. And if the Christian, conscious of the difficulty of reconciling the New, with the Old, Testament, attempts t
o
 support the New, at the expense of the Old, Testament, upon which the former is, and was, built by the founders of Christianity ; then the Jew would tell him, that he acts as absurdly as would the man who should expect to make his house the firmer, by un
dermining, and weakening its foundation.
\par 
\par So that whether the Christian affirms, or denies, he is ruined either way. For he is reduced to this fatal d
ilemma. If the Old Testament contains a Revelation from God, then the New Testament is not from God, for God cannot contradict himself: and it can be proved abundantly, that the New Testament is contradictory, and repugnant to the Old and to itself too. I
f, on the other hand, the Old Testament contains no Revelation from God, then the New Testament must go down at any rate because it asserts that the Old Testament does contain a Revelation from God, and builds upon it, as a foundation.\emdash E.
\par }}}{\f0 
\par 
\par CHAPTER IX.
\par 
\par ON THE CHARACTER Of JESUS OF NAZARETH AND THE WEIGHT TO BE ALLOWED TO THE ARGUMENT Of MARTYRDOM AS A TEST }{\i\f0 OF}{\f0  TRUTH IN THIS QUESTION.
\par 
\par I am now about to consider a subject, to which, notwithstanding the harsh ness of my language in some of the preceding chapt
ers, I approach with feelings of great respect. Far be it from me to reproach the meek, the compassionate, the amiable Jesus; or to attribute to him, the mischiefs occasioned by his followers}{\cs16\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright 
\f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20 There was nothing which gave the author, in writing this Book,
 so much uneasiness, at the apprehension of being supposed to entertain disrespectful sentiments of the Founder of the Christian Religion. I would most earnestly entreat the reader to believe my solemn assurances, that by nothing that I have said, or shal
l
 be under the necessity of saying, do I think, or mean to intimate the slightest disparagement to the moral character of one, whose purity of morals, and good intentions, deserve any thing else but reproach. That he was an enthusiast, I do not doubt, that
 
he was a wilful impostor I never will believe. And I protest before God, that from the apprehensions above-mentioned alone, I would have confined the contents of this volume to myself, did I not feel compelled to justify myself for having quitted a profes
sion : and did I not, above all, think it my duty, to make a well meant attempt, which I hope will be seconded, to vindicate the unbelief of an unfortunate nation, }{\i\f0\fs20 who,}{\f0\fs20 
 on that account, have for almost eighteen hundred years, been made the victim of rancoro
us prejudice, the most infernal cruelties, and the most atrocious wickedness. If the Christian religion be, in truth, not well founded, surely it is the duty of every honest and every humane, man, to endeavour to dispel an illusion, which certainly has be
en, notwithstanding any thing that can be said to the contrary, the }{\i\f0\fs20 bona fide,
\par }{\f0\fs20 and real cause of unspeakable misery, and of repeated, and remorseless plunderings, and massacres, to an unhappy people; the journal of whose sufferings, on account of it, forms 
the blackest page in the history of the human race, and the most detestable one in the history of human superstition.\emdash E.
\par }}}{\f0 .  No, I look upon his character with the respect which every man should pay to }{\i\f0 purity of morals :}{\f0  though mingled with something like 
the sentiments which we naturally feel for the mistaken enthusiast. Jesus of Nazareth appears to have been a man of irreproachable purity, of great piety, and of great mildness of disposition. Though the world has never beheld a character exactly parallel
 with his, yet it has seen many, greatly similar. Contemplative, and melancholy, it is said of him by his followers, \ldblquote he was often seen to weep, but never to laugh.\rdblquote 
 He retired to solitary places, and there prayed: he went into the wilderness to sustain and
 to vanquish the assaults of the devil: In a word, he appears by such means to have persuaded himself, as hundreds have done since, that he was the chosen servant of God, raised up to preach righteousness to the hypocrites, and sinners of his day. It is r
emarkable, that he never claimed to be the Messiah, till encouraged to assume that character by Peter\rquote 
s declaration. And it is observable, that in assuming that name, he could not assume the characteristics of the august personage to whom it belongs; but in
fused into the character all that softness, meekness, humility, and passive fortitude, which were so eminently his own. The natural disposition, and character of Jesus, could not permit him to attempt the character of a princely Messiah, a mighty monarch,
 
the saviour of an oppressed people, and the benefactor of the human race. He could not do this, but he could act as much of the character as was consistent with his own. He could not indeed bring himself to attempt to be the saviour of his countrymen from
 
the Romans, their fleshly foes; but he undertook to save them from the tyranny of their spiritual enemies. He could not undertake to set up his kingdom upon earth; but he told them that he had a kingdom in another world. He could not pretend to give unto 
his followers the splendid rewards of an earthly monarch: but he promised them instead thereof, forgiveness of sins, and spiritual remuneration.
\par 
\par In a word, he was not a king fit for the, then, \lquote carnal Jews,\rquote  but he was, from his mildness, and compassionate
 temper, worthy of their esteem, at least, of their forbearance. The only actions of his life which betray any marks of character deserving of serious reprehension, are his treatment of the woman taken in adultery ; and his application of the prophecy of 
Malachi concerning Elias, to John the Baptist.
\par 
\par As to his conduct to the woman, it was the conduct of a mild, and merciful man, but not that of one who declared, \ldblquote  that he came to fulfil the law.\rdblquote  For God commanded concerning such, \ldblquote  that they should surely
 be put to death.\rdblquote 
 Now though Jesus was not her judge, and had no right to pronounce her sentence; yet the contrivance by which he deterred the witness from testifying against her, was a contrivence directly calculated totally to frustrate the ends of just
ice; and which, if acted upon at this day, in Christian countries, would infallibly prevent the execution of the criminal law: For what testimony would be sufficient to prove a fact, if the witnesses were required to be \ldblquote  without sin ?
\rdblquote  Instead, therefore, of saying unto them, \ldblquote  whosoever of you is without sin, let him cast the first stone at her;\rdblquote  he should have said,  \lquote 
Men! who made me a judge, or a ruler over you? carry the accused to the proper tribunal.\rquote 
\par 
\par As to his conduct about the matter of Elias, it was as follows. It is }{\i\f0 said, }{\f0 in the 17th chapter of Matthew, that at his transfiguration, as it is called, Moses, and Elias appeared to his disciples on the mount, talking with }{\i\f0 Jesus. }{
\f0 Upon coming down from the mount, the disciples asked Jesus, \ldblquote  how say the scribes that Elias must come first, (that is, before the Messiah.) Jesus answered, Elias truly cometh first, and restoreth all things; but I say unto you, that Elias }
{\i\f0 has come already}{\f0  and they have done unto him what they would;\rdblquote  meaning John the Baptist, who was beheaded by Herod. (See the parallel place in Mark.) And he says concerning John, (Mat. vi. 14,) \ldblquote 
 And if ye will receive it, this is Elias which was for to come.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Now certainly no one will pretend that John was the Elias prophecied of by Malachi, as to come before \ldblquote  the great, and terrible day of the Lord,\rdblquote 
 which has not yet taken place. And besides, that he was not Elias is testified of, and confirmed by, John himself, who in the gospel of John, chapter 1, to the question of the Scribes, asking him, \ldblquote  if he was Elias ?\rdblquote  answers 
\ldblquote  I am not.\rdblquote  It is pretty clear that Jesus was embarrassed by the question of the Apostles, \ldblquote  how say the Scribes, that Elias must come first ?\rdblquote 
 for his answer is confused ; for he allows the truth of the observation of the Scribes, and then refers them to John, and insinuates that he was \ldblquote  the Elias to come.\rdblquote 
 However, it must be acknowledged, that he does it with an air of hesitation, \ldblquote  If you will receive it,\rdblquote  &c.
\par 
\par But are these all the accusations you have to bring again
st him ? may be said by some of my readers.  Do you account as nothing, his claiming to forgive sins ? his speeches wherein ho claims to be considered as an object of religious homage, if not to be God himself? Do you consider these impieties as nothing ?
 I answer by asking\emdash  the following questions: What would you think of a man who, in our times, should set up those extraordinary claims ? and who should assert, that \ldblquote  eating his flesh, and drinking his blood\rdblquote 
 were necessary to secure eternal life? Who should say, that \ldblquote  he and God were one?\rdblquote  and should affirm (as Jesus does in the last chapters of John) that \ldblquote  God was inside of him, and dwelt in him; and that \ldblquote 
 he who had seen him, had seen God ?\rdblquote  What should we think of this? Should we consider such a man 
an object of wrath, or of pity? Should we not directly, and without hesitation, attribute such extravagancies to hallucination of mind ? Yes, certainly! and therefore the Jews were to blame for crucifying Jesus. If Christians had put to death every unfort
u
nate, who after being frenzied by religious fasting and contemplation, became wild enough to assert, that he was Christ, or God the Father, or the Virgin Mary, or even the Holy Trinity, they would have been guilty of more than fifty murders; for I have re
a
d of at least as many instances of this nature; and believe that more than two hundred such might be reckoned up from the hospital records of Europe alone. And that the founder of the Christian religion was not always in one coherent consistent mind, I th
i
nk will appear plain to every intelligent physician who reads his discourses; especially those in the gospel of John. They are a mixture of something that looks like sublimity, strangely disfigured by wild, and incoherent words. So unintelligible indeed, 
t
hat even the profoundest of Christian divines have never been able to fathom all their mysteries. To prove that I do not say these things rashly, wickedly, or out of any malignity towards the character of Jesus, which I really respect and venerate, I will
 establish my assertions by examples. For instance\emdash 
\par 
\par \emdash \emdash Many instances might be adduced of conduct directly subversive of the very design, to promote which, he said that he was sent into the world. For example, he said that he came to preach glad tidings to 
the poor, and uninformed; and yet he declares to his disciples, that ho spake to this very multitude of poor and ignorant people in parables, lest they might understand him, and be converted from their sins, and God should heal, or pardon them. la the,-26
th chapter of Matthew, Jesus says to his disciples, in the garden }{\i\f0 at}{\f0  Gethsemane, these strange words, \ldblquote  Sleep on now, and take your rest\emdash  Arise! let us be going,\rdblquote  }{\i\f0 The}{\f0 
 commentators endeavour to get rid of the strange contradictoriness of these words, by turning the command into the future; and rendering the Greek word translated \ldblquote now\rdblquote  thus\emdash  \ldblquote for the rest of your time,\rdblquote  or 
\ldblquote  for the future.\rdblquote  And that he asked them \ldblquote  whether they slept for the future\rdblquote  ?! which appears to be just as rational as to have asked, \ldblquote  how they do to-morrow\rdblquote  ?!!
\par 
\par Jo. viii. 51, \ldblquote Verily, verily .(said Jesus) I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see death \ldblquote  Reader, what dost thou th
ink of this saying ? Has believing in the Christian religion, at all prevented men from dying as in afore time? And should we be at all astonished at what the Jews said to him, when they heard this assertion\emdash  \ldblquote 
Then said the Jews unto him. Now we know that thou hast a demon [i. e. art mad.] Abraham is dead, and the Prophets, and thou sayest if a man keep my saying, he shall never taste of death ?\rdblquote 
 So said the Jews, and if in our times, a man was to make a similar assertion, should we not say the same ?
\par 
\par Many
 instances might also be given of strange and inconsequent reasoning; but I shall only adduce the following. He reproaches the Pharisees, Luke xi. 47, 48, for building and adorning the sepulchres of the Prophets, whom their wicked fathers slew ; and says 
to them, \ldblquote  Your fathers slew them, and ye build their sepulchres,\rdblquote  and he adds, \ldblquote  that thus they showed that they approved the deeds of their fathers !\rdblquote 
 Surely this is absurd ! Did the Athenians by setting up a statue to Socrates after his unjust death, show to the world that they \ldblquote  approved\rdblquote 
 the deed of them who slew him ? did it not show the direct contrary ? and was it not intended as a testimony of their regret, and repentance?
\par 
\par Again, \ldblquote  Upon you (says Jesus to the Jews) shall come all the righteous blood that has been shed upon the earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous, to the blood of Zechariah,\rdblquote 
 &c. Now, herein is a marvellous thing! how could a man really sent from God, assert t
o the Jews, that of them should be required the blood of Abel, and of all the righteous slain upon the earth? Did the Jews kill Abel? or did their fathers kill him? No! he was slain by Cain, whose posterity all perished in the deluge; how then could God r
equire of the Jews who lived four thousand years after the murder, the guilt of it; nay more, \ldblquote of all the righteous blood that had been shed upon the earth,\rdblquote 
 were they guilty of all that too ? If such assertions, and such reasonings do not prove what I asserted, what can ?
\par 
\par It is said, that Jesus, by giving himself up to suffer death, proved the truth of his mission and doctrines, by his readiness to die for them.  But this is an argument which will recoil upon those who advance it. Are there no instances up
on record of mild, zealous, and amiable men who preached to the savages of America that they ought to worship the Virgin Mary ? and did they not cheerfully die by the most excruciating torments to prove it ? Yes certainly! and let any Protestant Christian
 
read the accounts of the preaching, sufferings, deaths, aye! and miracles too, of the Roman Catholic missionaries in Asia, and America ; and then let him candidly answer whether he is willing to rest the issue of his controversy with the Papists upon the 
argument of martyrdom? We all know the power of enthusiasm upon a susceptible mind; and we have read of, and perhaps }{\i\f0 sees, }{\f0 
its effects in producing martyrdoms among people of all religions, in all parts of the world. Nay, more, such is the power of this pri
nciple, that even now, women in India burn themselves alive on the funeral piles of their husbands, to prove, as they say, their love for them, and their determination to accompany them to the other world; when it is well known, that they burn themselves 
f
rom the impulse of vanity, and the fear of disgrace, if they should not do so. Nay, more still, so little support does martyrdom yield to truth, that there are more martyrdoms in honour of the false, ridiculous, and abominable idols of Hindostan, than any
 
where else. You may see men hooked through the ribs, and supported, and whirled round in the air in honour of their gods, clapping their hands, and testifying pleasure, instead of crying out with pain. You may see in that country, the misguided enthusiast
i
c worshippers of misshapen idols prostrate their bodied before the enormous wheels of the car of Seeva, and piously suffering themselves to be crushed in pieces by the rolling mass. And any man who has been upon the banks of the Ganges, can tell you of th
e
 Yoguis, and of their self-inflicted torments, compared to which, even the cross is almost a bed of roses. Indeed the argument of martyrdom will support any religion; and it has, in fact, been cheerfully undergone by enthusiasts and zealots of all religio
ns, in testimony of the firm belief of the sufferers not only in the absurdities of Popery, and Brachinanism, but of every, even the most monstrous system that ever disgraced the human understanding. There have been martyrs for Atheism itself.
\par 
\par This argument of martyrdom has been more particularly applied to the Apostles and first Christians. \ldblquote 
 How can it be imagined, (say Christian Divines,) that simple men like the Apostles could be induced to leave their employment, and wander up and down, to teach the do
ctrines, and testify to the facts of the New Testament, and expose themselves to persecution, imprisonment, scourging, and untimely and violent death: unless they certainly knew, that both the doctrines, and the facts were true? Besides, what honours, wha
t riches, could they expect to get by supporting false doctrine, and false testimony ?\rdblquote 
\par 
\par To this argument 1 might reply as in the preceding pages, for I would ask, have we not seen simple and honest men quit their employments, and wander up and down to prea
ch doctrines which they not only had no means of certainly knowing to be true, but which they did not even understand ? Have we not seen such men submit to deprivations of every kind, and exposed to imprisonment, and the whipping post ? And do we not cert
ainly know that some such have cheerfully suffered a most cruel death ?
\par 
\par Is it possible that any sensible man, after reading the History of the Roman Catholic Missionaries, the Baptists, the Quakers, and the Methodists, can be convinced of the certain truth
 of the Christian religion, or seriously endeavour to convince another of it, by such an argument as the above ?
\par 
\par But, much more than this can be said upon this topic; for it can be shown, that the Apostles in preaching Christianity, did not suffer near so
 much as some well meaning enthusiasts in modern times have suffered, to propagate religious tenets, notoriously false and absurd. And that the Apostles could expect to get neither fame, nor honour, nor riches by their preaching is doubtful. This is certa
in that they could not lose much. For they were confessedly men of the lowest rank in society, and of great poverty\emdash 
poor fishermen, who could not feel a very great regard for their own dignity, or respectability. And it was by no means a small thing for such men to be considered as divine Apostles, and \ldblquote  in exchange for heavenly things,\rdblquote 
 to have the earthly possessions of their converts laid at their feet. }{\i\f0 Peter}{\f0  left his nets, his boat, and boorish companions, and after persuading his disciples to receive hi
s words for oracles, go where he would, he found ample hospitality from them. This, at least, was an advantageous change, and though they did not acquire fame, or respect from the higher ranks of society, they were at least had in great respect by their f
o
llowers. Neither George Fox, nor Whitfield, nor Westley were honoured by the nobility, or gentry, or scholars of England; nor Ann Lee, by the most respectable citizens of the United States. Yet among their disciples, the Quakers, the Methodists, and the S
hakers they were held by the most implicit veneration and can any man believe that they did not think themselves thus well payed for the trouble of making converts ?
\par 
\par It is true that the Apostles did not acquire riches, for they were conversant only with th
e poor. But neither had they any to lose, by taking up the profession of Apostles, and Preachers. At least by preaching the gospel, they obtained food, and clothing, and contributions; as is evident from many places in the Epistles, where they write to th
eir converts, \ldblquote  It is written, \lquote thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn;\rquote \rdblquote  and Paul tells them, that they must not think from this place, that God takes care for oxen, \ldblquote 
 for, (says he,) it was undoubtedly written for our sakes.\rdblquote  Thus we see that the gospel was by no means altogether unprofitable, and many men daily risk their lives for less gain than the Apostles did.
\par 
\par As to the dangers to which it is said they exposed themselves, they had none to fear, except in Judea, which they quickly 
quitted, finding the Jews too stubborn, and went to the Greeks. From the Greeks, and likewise from the Romans, they had not much to fear, who were not very difficult or scrupulous in admitting new gods, and new modes of worship. Besides}{\i\f0  }{\f0 
this, the Romans for a great while seem to have considered the Christians}{\i\f0  }{\f0 
merely as a Jewish sect who differed from the rest of the Jews in matters not worth notice ; as is to be gathered from Tacitus and Suetonius. And if the Apostles did speak against the Pagan gods, it wa
s no more than what the Roman poets and philosophers did; and the magistrates were not then very severe about it. And it is evident from the Acts of the Apostles, that the Roman praetors considered the accusations against Paul and his companions, as mere 
t
rifles. But in Judea, where the danger was evident, it was otherwise. When Paul was in peril there, on account of his transgressions against the law, after being delivered from the Jews by the Roman garrison at Jerusalem, he pleaded before Festus and Agri
p
pa, that he was falsely accused by the Jews; and he asserted that he had taught nothing against the Law of Moses, and his country, but that he only preached about the resurrection of the dead ; and that it was for this that the Jews persecuted him; and en
d
ed by appealing to Caesar. When yet he knew that this was not the reason of the hatred of the Jew against him ; but that it was because he taught that circumcision, and the Law of Moses were abolished, and no longer binding: which is evident to any one wh
o will read the Acts, and the Epistle to the Galatians. So you see by what manoeuvre he got out of the difficulty: first, by at least equivocating, and then by}{\i\f0  }{\f0 
refusing to be tried by his own countrymen, and appealing to Caesar; thus securing himself a safe
 conduct out of Judea, which was too dangerous for him. Among the Gentiles, their doctrine had a better chance of success, for they taught them marvellous doctrines, such as they had been accustomed to listen to, viz. how the Son of God was born of a virg
in, and was cruelly put to death; and that his Divine Father raised him from the dead. The idea of God\rquote 
s having a son of a woman did not shock them, for all their demigods they believed had been so begotten; and a great part of their poems are filled with t
he exploits and the sufferings of these heroes, who are at length rewarded by being raised from earth to heaven, as Jesus is said to have been. These doctrines were not disrelished by the common people, but were rejected by the wise and learned. According
l
y we see that Paul could make nothing of the philosophers of Athens, who derided him, and considered him as telling them a story similar to those of their own mythology, when he preached to them Jesus and the resurrection. And in revenge, we see Paul rail
ing against both the stubborn Jews, and the incorrigible philosophers, as being unworthy of knowing \ldblquote  the hidden wisdom,\rdblquote  which was to the one \ldblquote  a stumbling block,\rdblquote  and to the other, \ldblquote  foolishness,
\rdblquote  and which he thought fit only for \ldblquote  the babes,\rdblquote  and \ldblquote  the devout women,\rdblquote  with whom he principally dealt.
\par 
\par That the New Testament inculcates an excellent morality, cannot be denied; for its best moral precepts were taken from the Old Testament. And if the Apostles had not preached good morals, how could they have 
expected to be considered by the Gentiles as messengers from God ? For if they had inculcated any immoralities, such as rebellion, murder, adultery, robbery, revenge, their mission would not only have been disbelieved, but they would have undergone capita
l
 punishment by the sentence of the judge, which it was their business to avoid. Mahomet, throughout the Koran, inculcates all the virtues, and pointedly reprobates vice of all kinds. His morality is merely the precepts of the Old and New Testaments, modif
ied a little, and expressed in Arabic. They are good precepts, and always to be listened to with respect, wherever, and by whomsoever, inculcated. But surely that will not prove Islamism to be from God, nor that Mahomet was his prophet!
\par 
\par That the Apostles suffered death on account of their preaching the gospel, if allowed to be fact, as said before, proves nothing. Many have suffered death for false and absurd doctrines. \ldblquote 
But whether any of the Apostles, (besides James who was slain by Herod,) died a natural
, or a violent death, the learned Christians do not certainly know. For there is extant no authentic history of the Apostles, besides the Acts. There are indeed many fabulous narrations published by the Papists, called Martyrologies, stuffed with the most
 
extravagant lies, which no learned man now regards; and who therefore will credit what such books say of the Apostles ? Peter is said in them to have been put to death at Rome by Nero, nevertheless most of the learned men of the Protestants assert, that P
e
ter never was in Rome, and as for Paul, no one certainly knows where, when, or how ho finished his days. So that if we were even to allow the feeble argument of Martyrdom, all the influence and weight given to it, it would not apply to the Apostles, who, 
we are sure, derived some benefit, by preaching the gospel, and are not sure that they came to any harm by it.
\par 
\par I will conclude this long chapter, by laying before my reader some extracts from the book written by Celsus, a heathen philosopher, against Chris
tianity, preserved by Origen in his work against Celsus. That the entire work of Celsus is lost, is to be regretted; as he appears to have been a man of observation, though too sarcastic to please a fair inquirer ; and from the picture given by him of the
 
first Christians, their maxims, and their modes of teaching, and the subjects they chose for converts, it appears, that they were the exact prototypes of the Methodists and Shakers of the present day, both sects which contain excellent people, with hardly
 any fault but credulity.
\par 
\par \ldblquote  If they (i. e. the teachers of Christianity,) say \lquote do not examine,\rquote  and the like: it is however incumbent on them to teach what those things are which they assert, and whence they are derived.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  Wisdom in life is a bad thing, but folly is good.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  Why should Jesus, when an infant, be carried into Egypt, lest he should be murdered ? God should not fear being put to death.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  You say that God was sent to sinners : but why not to those who are free from sin ? What harm is it not to have sinned ?
\par 
\par \ldblquote  You encourage sinners, because you are not able to persuade any really good men: therefore you open the doors to the most wicked and abandoned.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  Some of them }{\i\f0 say  \lquote }{\f0 do not examine, but believe, and thy faith shall gave thee.\rquote \rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  T
hese are our institutions, say they, let not any man of learning come here, nor any wise man, nor any man of prudence: for these things are reckoned evil by us. But whoever is unlearned, ignorant, and silly, let him come without fear ! Thus they own that 
they can gain only the foolish, the vulgar, the stupid slaves, women, and children.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote At first, when they were but few, they agreed. But when they became a multitude, they were rent, again and again, and each will have their own factions: for factious spirits they had from the beginning.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  All wise men are excluded from the doctrine of their faith ; they call to it only fools, and men of a servile spirit.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  The preachers of their divine word only attempt to persuade silly, mean, senseless persons, slave
s, women, and children. What harm is there in being well-informed ; and both in being, and appearing a man of knowledge ? What obstacle can this be to the knowledge of God ? Must it not be an advantage ?\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  We see these Itinerants shewing readily their tr
icks to the vulgar, but not approaching the assemblies of wise men, nor daring there to show themselves. But wherever they see boys, a crowd of slaves, and ignorant men, there they thrust in themselves, and show off their doctrine.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  You may see weavers,
 tailors, and fullers, illiterate and rustic men, not daring to utter a word before persons of age, experience, and respectability; but when they get hold of boys privately, and silly women, they recount wonderful things; that they must not mind their fat
h
ers, or their tutors, but obey them; as their fathers, or guardians are quite ignorant, and in the dark; but themselves alone have the true wisdom. And if the children obey them, they pronounce them happy, and direct them to leave their fathers, and tutor
s, and go with the women, and their play-fellows, into the chambers of the females, or into a tailor\rquote s, or fuller\rquote s shop, that they may learn perfection.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Celsus compares a Christian teacher to a quack\emdash   \ldblquote who promises to heal the sick, on condition that they keep from intelligent practitioners, lest his ignorance be detected.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  If one sort of them introduces one doctrine, another another, and all join in saying,  \lquote Believe if you would be saved, or depart:\rquote  what are they to do, who desire really to be save
d ? Are they to determine by the throw of a die, where they are to turn themselves, or which of these demanders of implicit faith they are to believe.\rdblquote }{\i\f0 
\par 
\par }{\f0 Omitting what Celsus says reproachfully of the moral characters of the Apostles, and the first teachers of Christianity, for which we certainly shall not take }{\i\f0 his}{\f0 
 word; it is easy to perceive from the above quotations, that they had more success among simple, and credulous people, than among the intelligent, and well-informed. Their introductory lesson to their pupils, was, \ldblquote 
 Believe, but do not examine ;\rdblquote  and their succeeding instructions seem to have been a continued repetition, and practice of the dogma of implicit }{\i\f0 faith}{\cs16\i\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {
\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20  Jerome, in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Galatians, says, that \ldblquote  The Church of Christ was not gathered from the Academy, or the Lyceum, but from the lowest of the people.\rdblquote 
 [Vili Plebecula.] And Coecilius, in Minutius Felix, says, that the Christian assemblies were made up \ldblquote  de ultima faece collectis, imperitioribus, et mulieribus credulis sexus suae facilitate labentibus,\rdblquote  i. e. \ldblquote 
 that they consisted of the lowest of the mob, simple and unlearned, men, and credulous women.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par The president of a province is introduced, by Prudentius as thus addressing a martyr :\emdash  
\par }{\f0\fs20\lang1040 \ldblquote  Tu qui Doctor, ait, seris novellum
\par Commenti genus, ut Leves Puellae,
\par Lucos destituunt, Jovem relinquant;
\par Damnes, si sapias, ANILE DOGMA.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs20 The Christian Fathers confess, and glory in it, that the }{\i\f0\fs20 greater part}{\f0\fs20  of their congregations consisted of women and children, slaves, beggars, and vagabonds.
\par 
\par The Jewish Christians were, as appears evidently from the New Testament, exceedingly poor, and therefore there is frequent mention made of }{\i\f0\fs20 contributions}{\f0\fs20  for \ldblquote  the poor Saints at Jerusalem.\rdblquote 
 From thence it was that the Jewish Christians got the name of }{\i\f0\fs20 Ebionites,}{\f0\fs20  i. e. }{\i\f0\fs20 Poor.}{\f0\fs20 
 The Jewish Christian Church consisted of the dregs of the Jewish people, simple and ignorant men, Samaritans, &c. No person in Judea of eminence, o
r learning, appears to have joined the sect of the Nazarenes, except Paul; after the destruction of Jerusalem they gradually dwindled in number, and became extinct.\emdash E.
\par }}}{\i\f0 .
\par 
\par }{\f0 CHAPTER X.
\par 
\par MISCELLANEOUS
\par 
\par In Matthew, ch. v. Jesus says, \ldblquote  ye have heard that it was said, that shalt love thy neighbour and hate thine enemy.'\rdblquote 
 But this is no where said in the Law, or the Prophets; but, on the contrary, we read directly the reverse. For it is written, Ex. xxiii. \ldblquote  If thou find the ox of thine enemy or his ass going astray, thou shalt certainly bring him back to him.
\rdblquote  \ldblquote  If thou meet the ass of him that hateth thee, lying under his burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help him.\rdblquote  Again, Levit. xix. \ldblquote  Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart; re
buke thy neighbour, nor suffer sin upon him. Thou shalt }{\i\f0 not revenge,}{\f0  nor keep anger, (or bear any grudge,) against the children of thy people; but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself; I am the Lord.\rdblquote  So also in Prov. xxxiv. 
\ldblquote  When thine enemy falleth, do not triumph, and when he stumbleth, let not thine heart exult.\rdblquote  So also in ch. xxv. \ldblquote  If thy enemy hunger, give him food ; if he thirst, give him to drink.\rdblquote 
 These precepts are to the purpose, and are practicable ; but this command of Jesus, \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 Love your enemies,\rdblquote }{\f0  if by loving he means, \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 do them good,\rdblquote }{\f0 
 it is commanded in the above passages in the Hebrew Law. But if by \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 love,\rdblquote }{\f0  he means to look upon them with the }{\i\f0 same .affection}{\f0  that we feel for those who love us, and with whom we are connected by the ten
derest ties of mature, and friendship, the command is }{\i\f0 impracticable;}{\f0  and the fulfillment of it contrary to nature, and those very instincts given us by our Creator. And therefore, whoever thinks he fulfills, }{\i\f0 really fulfills}{\f0 
 this command, does in fact play the hypocrite }{\i\f0 unknown to himself;}{\f0  for though we }{\i\f0 can,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 ought}{\f0  to do good to our enemy, yet to }{\i\f0 love him}{\f0  is as unnatural as to hate our friends.
\par 
\par In Mark ch. ii. 25, Jesus says to the Pharisees, \ldblquote  Have ye not read what David did when he hungered, and those that were with him. How that he entered into the house of the Lord, in the time }{\i\f0 of Abiathar}{\f0 
 the High Priest, and did eat of the shew-bread, &c.\rdblquote  See the same also in Matthew, ch. xii. 3. Luke vi. 3. Now here is a great blunder ; for this thing happened in 
the time of Achimelech, not in the time of Abiathar ; for so it is written, 1 Sam. xxi. \ldblquote  And David came to Nob, to Achimelech the Priest, &c.\rdblquote  And in the 22d chapter it is said that Abiathar was }{\i\f0 his son.
\par 
\par }{\f0 In Luke ch. i. 26, The angel Gabriel is said to ha
ve come from God to Mary, when she was yet a virgin, espoused to Joseph, who was of the house of David, and announced to her that she should conceive, and bear a son, and should call his name Jesus; that her holy offspring should be called the Son of God,
 and that God should give unto him \ldblquote  the throne of David his father, and that he should rule the house of Jacob for ever, and that to his kingdom there should be no end.\rdblquote 
 Now this story is encumbered with many difficulties, which I shall not consider; but confine myself to asking wherefore, if these things were true, did not the Mother of Jesus? and his brethren, knowing these extraordinary things, }{\i\f0 
obey his teachings.}{\f0  For it is certain, that they did not at first believe him, but, as appears from the 7th cha
p. of John, derided him. Besides, neither did his mother nor his brethren, when they came to the house where he was preaching to simple and credulous men, come for the purpose of being edified, but \ldblquote  to lay hold of him,\rdblquote 
 to carry him home, for said they he is }{\i\f0 mad,}{\f0  or \ldblquote  beside himself [Mark iii. 24] which certainly they would not have dared to do, if this story}{\i\f0  }{\f0 of Luke\rquote 
s were true. For their mother would have taught them of his miraculous conception, and extraordinary character. Moreover, how was it that God
 did not give him the throne of David, as was promised by the Angel to his Mother? For he did not sit upon the throne of David, nor exercise any authority in Israel. Moreover, how comes it that David is called the Father of Jesus, since Jesus was }{\i\f0 
not}{\f0  the son of Joseph, who, according to the Evangelists drew his origin from that king. Finally, the saying \ldblquote  that to his kingdom there should be no end,\rdblquote 
 is directly contradicted by Paul in the 1st Epis. to the Cor. ch. xv: for he says therein, that \ldblquote  Jesus shall render up his kingdom unto the Father, and be himself subject unto him.\rdblquote  Here you see, that the kingdom of Jesus }{\i\f0 is}
{\f0  to have an end ; for when he renders up his kingdom to the Father, he certainly must divest himself of his authority. How then can it be said, that \ldblquote  to his kingdom there shall be no end ?
\par 
\par Jesus says, John v. 39, \ldblquote  And the Father himself which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me ; ye have neither heard his voice at any time,\rdblquote  &c. But how does this agree with Moses, who says, Deut. iv. 33, \ldblquote 
 Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of fire, as thou hast heard?\rdblquote \emdash   \ldblquote And }{\i\f0 we}{\f0 
 heard his voice out of the midst of the fire ; we have seen this day, that God doth talk with man, and he liveth.\rdblquote  Deut. v. 24.
\par 
\par Luke, ch. }{\i\f0 4,}{\f0  17, \ldblquote  And they gave to Jesus the Book of Isaiah the Prophet, and he opened the Book, and found this place, where it was written, \lquote 
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore hath he anointed me to preach the Gospel; to the poor hath he sent me, that I should bin
d up the broken in heart, proclaim liberty to the captives, and sight to the blind ; that I should preach the acceptable year of the Lord.\rquote  And shutting the Book, he gave it to the minister, and afterwards addressed them, saying \lquote 
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears.\rdblquote 
 Here you see the words which gave offence; and by turning to Is. in loco. ch. lxi. you may see the reason why the inhabitants of Nazareth arose up in wrath against him. For these words alledged in Luke, are somewhat perverted from
 the original in Isaiah ; for these words, \ldblquote and sight to the blind,\rdblquote  are }{\i\f0 not}{\f0  in Isaiah, but are inserted in Luke for purposes very obvious. And 2. he neglects the words following, \ldblquote 
 and the day of vengeance of our God, and of consolation to all who mourn. To give consolation to the mourners of Zion; to give them beauty instead of ashes, and the oil of joy instead of grief; a garment of praise instead of a broken heart,\rdblquote 
 &c. to the end of the chapter. From this it is very clear, that this prophecy has no reference to Jesus: but Isaiah speaks these things of }{\i\f0 himself;}{\f0  and the words \ldblquote  the Lord hath anointed me,\rdblquote  signify, \ldblquote 
 God hath chosen, established me to declare\rdblquote \emdash what follows. This exposition of anointing is confirmed from these passages;\emdash 1 Kings, xix ch.
\par 
\par \ldblquote }{\i\f0 Anoint}{\f0  a prophet in thy stead,\rdblquote  where the sense is, \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 constitute}{\f0  a prophet in thy place.\rdblquote  Again, \ldblquote  touch not mine anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm,\rdblquote  i. e. 
\ldblquote  Touch not my chosen servants\rdblquote ; and so in several other places. The meaning, therefore, of
 Isaiah is, that God had appointed, and constituted him a prophet to announce these consolations to the Israelites, who were to be in captivity, in order that they should not dispair of liberation; and that they should have hope, when they read those comf
ortable words spoken by the mouth of Isaiah, at the command of God. For he calls the subjects of his message \ldblquote  the broken in heart,\rdblquote  \ldblquote  the captives,\rdblquote  \ldblquote  the mourners of Zion,\rdblquote 
 &c. all which terms are applicable }{\i\f0 only}{\f0  to the Israelites. That this is the true interpretation, will be made further evident to any impartial person, by reading the context preceding, and following.
\par 
\par Jo. ch. ii. v. 18. \ldblquote  The Jews said to Jesus, what sign showest thou to us, that thou doest these things ? Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. The Jews answered, saying, }{\i\f0 
forty and six years}{\f0  was this temple in building, and wilt thou build it in three days ?\rdblquote  The Jews could never have spoken these words, here related ; for the temple then standing was built by }{\i\f0 Herod,}{\f0  who reigned but }{\i\f0 
thirty-seven}{\f0  years, and built it in }{\i\f0 eight}{\f0  years. This, therefore, must be a blunder of the Evangelist\rquote s.
\par 
\par Jo. xiii. v. 21. Jesus says to his Disciples, \ldblquote  a }{\i\f0 new}{\f0  commandment I give unto you, that ye }{\i\f0 love}{\f0  one another.\rdblquote  This is not true, for the love of man towards his neighbour, was }{\i\f0 not}{\f0  a }{\i\f0 new}
{\f0  precept, but at least as ancient as Moses, who gives it, Levit. xix. as the command of God, \ldblquote  Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Acts vii. v. 4.  \ldblquote When he (Abraham) went out of the land of the Chaldees, he dwelt in Charran; from thence }{\i\f0 after his father was dead,}{\f0  he led him into this land in which ye dwell.\rdblquote 
 This directly contradicts the chapter in Genesis where the story of Abraham's leaving Haran is related; for it
 is certain from thence, that Abraham left his father Terah in Haran alive, when he departed thence. And he did not die till many years afterwards. This chronological contradiction has given much trouble to Christian Commentators, as may be seen in }{
\i\f0 Whitby, Hammond,}{\f0  &c. &c.
\par 
\par V. 14, Stephen says, \ldblquote  Jacob therefore descended into Egypt, and our Fathers, and there died. And they were carried to Sichem, and buried in the sepulchre which }{\i\f0 Abraham}{\f0  bought from the Sons of Hemor the Father of Sichem.\rdblquote 
 Here is another blunder; for this piece of land was }{\i\f0 not}{\f0  purchased by }{\i\f0 Abraham,}{\f0  but by }{\i\f0 Jacob.}{\f0  Gen. xlix. 29; so also see the end of Joshua. But it is evident, that Stephen has }{\i\f0 confounded}{\f0 
 the story of the purchase of the field of Machpelah, recorded in Gen. xxiii. with the circumstances related concerning the purchase by Jacob.
\par 
\par In v. 43 of the same chapter, there is another disagreement between Stephen's quotation from Amos, and the original. [In the Acts the quotation is, \emdash   \ldblquote Yea, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and t
he Star of your God . Remphan, figures which ye made to worship them, and I will carry you away beyond Babylon.\rdblquote  In Amos, ch. v. 26\emdash  \ldblquote 
But ye have borne the tabernacle of Moloch and Chinn your images, the Star of your God which ye made,\rdblquote  &c.]
\par 
\par So also there is in the speech of James, Acts xv. a quotation from Amos, in which to make it fit the subject, (which after all it does not fit,) is the substitution of the words, \ldblquote  the remnant of }{\i\f0 men,\rdblquote }{\f0  for the words, 
\ldblquote  remnant of }{\i\f0 Edom,\rdblquote }{\f0  as it is in the original.
\par 
\par All these mistakes, besides others to be met with in almost\emdash 
I was going to say in every page, of these Histories of Jesus and his Apostles, sufficiently show how superficial was the acquaintance of these men with the Old Testament, and how grossly, either throu
gh design or ignorance, they have perverted it. Indeed from these mistakes }{\i\f0 alone,}{\f0 
 I should be led strongly to suspect, that the Books of the New Testament were written by Gentiles, as I can hardly conceive that any Jew could have quoted his Bible in such a blundering manner.
\par 
\par 
\par CHAPTER XI.
\par 
\par WHETHER THE MOSAIC LAW BE REPRESENTED IN THE OLD TESTAMENT AS A TEMPORARY, OR A PERPETUAL INSTITUTION.
\par 
\par A very great part of Dogmatic Theology among Christians is founded upon the notion that the Jewish Law was a }{\i\f0 temporary}{\f0  dispensation, only to exist till the coming of Jesus, when it was to be superseded by a more perfect dispensation.
\par 
\par On the contrary, the Jews are persuaded that their Law is of perpetual obligation, and the Doctrine of the Trinity itself is hardly more o
ffensive to them, and, as they think, more contradictory to the Scriptures, than the notion of the abrogation of it. Now, that the Jews are on the right side of this question, i. e., arguing from the Old Testament, I shall endeavour to prove by several ar
guments. They are all comprised in these positions, 1. That the Mosaic Institutions are most solemnly, and repeatedly declared to be }{\i\f0 perpetual;}{\f0  and we have no account of their }{\i\f0 being abrogated,}{\f0  or }{\i\f0 to be abrogated}{\f0 
 in the Old Testament. 2. They are declared to be perpetual by Jesus himself, and were adhered to by the twelve apostles.
\par 
\par 1. Nothing can be more expressly asserted in the Old Testament than the perpetual obligation of those rites which were to distinguish the Jews from other nations. It appears, for 
instance, (from the 17th ch. of Genesis,) in the tenor of the covenant made with Abraham, that }{\i\f0 circumcision}{\f0  was to distinguish his posterity, to the end of time. It is called \ldblquote  an }{\i\f0 everlasting covenant\rdblquote  to}{\f0 
 be kept by his posterity through }{\i\f0 all their generations.}{\f0 
 See the ch. where the condition of the covenant is, that God would give to Abraham and his posterity, the perpetual inheritance of the promised land with whatever privileges were implied in his being }{\i\f0 their God,}{\f0 
 on condition that their male children were circumcised in testimony of putting themselves under that covenant. There is }{\i\f0 no limitation}{\f0  with respect to }{\i\f0 time;}{\f0  nay it is expressly said that the covenant should be }{\i\f0 
perpetual.
\par 
\par }{\f0 The ordinance of }{\i\f0 the Passover}{\f0  is also said to be }{\i\f0 perpetual,}{\f0  Ex. xii. 14, &c. \ldblquote  And this day shall be unto you for a memorial, and you shall keep it as a feast to the Lord }{\i\f0 throughout your generations.}{
\f0  You shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.\rdblquote  This is repeated afterwards, and the observance of this rite is confined to Israelites, Proselytes, and slaves who should be circumcised, v. 48.
\par 
\par The observance of the }{\i\f0 Sabbath}{\f0  was }{\i\f0 never}{\f0  to be }{\i\f0 discontinued,}{\f0  Ex. xxxi. 16. \ldblquote  Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath }{\i\f0 throughout their generations,}{\f0  for }{\i\f0 
a perpetual covenant.}{\f0  It is a sign between me and the children of Israel }{\i\f0 for ever.\rdblquote }{\f0 
\par 
\par The appointment of the Family of Aaron to be Priests, was to continue as long as }{\i\f0 the Israelites should be a nation.}{\f0  See Lev. vii. 35.
\par 
\par The Feast of }{\i\f0 Tabernacles}{\f0  was to }{\i\f0 be forever.}{\f0  Lev. xxiii. 41.  \ldblquote It shall be a statute }{\i\f0 for ever,}{\f0  in your generations.\rdblquote 
 The observance of this Festival is particularly mentioned in the prophecies, which foretell a future settlement of the Jews in their own land, as obligatory on all the world ; as if an union of worship at }{\i\f0 Jerusalem}{\f0 
 was to be, according to them, effected among all nations by the united observance of this Festival there, see Zech. 14 ; what he there says is confirmed by what Isaiah prophecied concerning the same period. Is. 2.  \ldblquote It shall come to pass i
n the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and }{\i\f0 all nations}{\f0 
 shall flow unto it. And many people shall go, and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and He  }{\i\f0 will teach us of his ways,}{\f0 
 and we will walk in his paths. For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the nations, and rebuke many people, 
and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation. shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par With respect to all the Laws of Moses, it is evident from the manner in which 
they were promulgated, that they were intended to be of perpetual obligation upon the Hebrew nation, and that by the observance of them they were to be distinguished from the other nations, see Deut. xxvi. 16.
\par 
\par The observance of their peculiar Laws was the
 express condition on which the Israelites were to continue in possession of the promised land ; and though on account of their disobedience they were to be driven out of it, they had the strongest assurances given them that they should never be utterly d
e
stroyed, like many other nations who should oppress them; but that on their repentance God would gather them from the remote parts of the world, and bring them to their own country again. And both Moses, and the later Prophets assure them, that in consequ
ence of their becoming obedient to God in all things, which it is asserted they will, (and which may be the natural consequence of the discipline they will have gone through,) they shall be continued in the peaceable enjoyment of the land of promise, in }
{\i\f0 its greatest extent}{\f0  to the end of time. See to this purpose Deut. iv. 25, &c. ; also. Deut. 30, where it is thus written.
\par 
\par \ldblquote And it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set before thee, and shal
t call them to mind among all the nations whither the Lord thy God hath driven thee; and shalt return unto the Lord thy God, and shall obey his voice according to all that I command thee this day, thou and thy children, with all thy heart, and with all th
y soul; that, then, the Lord thy God will }{\i\f0 turn thy captivity,}{\f0  and have compassion upon thee, and will return, and gather thee from }{\i\f0 all the nations}{\f0  whither the Lord thy God hath }{\i\f0 scattered thee.}{\f0 
 If any of thine be driven out unto the utmost parts of heaven, f
rom thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch thee. And the Lord thy God will bring thee unto the Land which thy Fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it, and He will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy Fathers. And
 
the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live; and the Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies, and on them that hate thee
, which }{\i\f0 persecuted thee.}{\f0  And thou shalt return, and obey the voice of the Lord, and }{\i\f0 do all his commandments which I command thee this day." &c.
\par 
\par }{\f0 \ldblquote What an extent of prophecy, and how firm a faith in the whole of it do we see here! (says Dr. Priestly.) The Israelites were not }{\i\f0 then}{\f0 
 in the land of Canaan. It was occupied by nations far more numerous, and powerful than they ; and yet it is distinctly foretold in the 4th ch. that they would soon take possession of it, and multiply in it: and that afterwards they w
ould offend God by their idolatry, and wickedness, and would in con- sequence of it be driven out of their country ; and without being exterminated or lost, be scattered among the nations of the world; that by this dispersion, and their calamities, they w
ould at length be reformed, and restored to the divine favour, and that then (as in the quotation) in }{\i\f0 the latter days}{\f0  they would be gathered from all nations, and restored to their own country, when they }{\i\f0 
would observe all the laws which were then prescribed to them.}{\f0  Past history, and present appearances, correspond with such wonderful exactness to what }{\i\f0 has been}{\f0 
 fulfilled of this prophecy, that we can have no doubt with respect to the complete accomplishment of what }{\i\f0 remains}{\f0  to be fulfilled of it.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par What was first announced by Moses, is repeated by Isaiah and other prophets, assuring them of their certain return wherever dispersed, to their own land in }{\i\f0 the latter days;}{\f0 
 and that they should have the undisturbed possession of it to the end of time.
\par 
\par It has been objected, that the term }{\i\f0 "for ever"}{\f0 
 is not always to be understood in its greatest extant, but is to be interpreted according to circumstances. This for the sake of saving time I will acknowledge. But the circumstances in which this phrase is used in the pas
sages already adduced, and in a number of others of similar import which might be adduced, clearly indicate, that it is to be understood in those passages to mean a period }{\i\f0 as long as the duration of the Israelitish nation,}{\f0 
 which elsewhere is said to continue }{\i\f0 to the end of the world.
\par 
\par }{\f0 For this reason, among others, this final return of the Jews from their present dispersed state, cannot at any rate be said to have been }{\i\f0 accomplished }{\f0 at their return from the Babylonish captivity.
\par 
\par For that captivity was not by any means such a }{\i\f0 total dispersion}{\f0  of the people }{\i\f0 among all nations,}{\f0 
 as Moses, and the later prophets have foretold. Nor does their possession of the country subsequent to it, at all correspond to that state of peace, and prosperity, which was promised to succeed this final return.
\par 
\par Figures of speech must, no doubt, be allowed for. But if the whole of the Jewish polity was to terminate at the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, }{\i\f0 (as}{\f0  is maintained by Christians,) }{\i\f0 while the world is still to continue,}{\f0 
 the magnificent promises made to Abraham, and his posterity, and to the nation, in general, afterwards, have }{\i\f0 never}{\f0  had any }{\i\f0 proper accomplishment}{\f0  of }{\i\f0 all.}{\f0  Because with respect to }{\i\f0 external prosperity,}{\f0 
 which is contained in the promises, many nations have }{\i\f0 hitherto}{\f0  been more distinguished by God, than the Jews. }{\i\f0 Hitherto}{\f0 
 the posterity of Ishmael has had a much happier lot than that of Isaac. To say, as Christians do, that these prophecies have had a }{\i\f0 spiritual}{\f0  accomplishment in the spread of the Gospel, when there is nothin
g in the phraseology in which the promises are expressed, that could possibly suggest any such ideas, nay, when the promise itself in the most definite language expresses the contrary, is so }{\i\f0 arbitrary}{\f0 
 a construction as nothing can warrant. By this mode of interpretation, }{\i\f0 any event}{\f0  may be said to be the fulfillment of }{\i\f0 any prophecy whatever.
\par 
\par }{\f0 Besides, it is perfectly evident, that these prophecies, whether they }{\i\f0 will}{\f0  be fulfilled, or not, cannot }{\i\f0 yet}{\f0  have been fulfilled. For all the calamity that was ever to befall the Jewish nation is expressly said }{\i\f0 
to bear no sensible proportion}{\f0  to their subsequent prosperity : whereas, their prosperity has }{\i\f0 hitherto}{\f0  borne a small proportion to their calamity; so that had Abraham really foreseen the fate of his posterity, he wo
uld on this idea, have had little reason to rejoice in the prospect.
\par 
\par It may be said, that the prosperity of the descendants of Abraham, was to depend }{\i\f0 on a condition,}{\f0  viz., their obedience, and that this condition was not fulfilled. But, besides that the D
ivine Being must have foreseen this circumstance, and therefore must have known that he was only tantalizing Abraham with a promise which would never be accomplished; this disobedience, and the consequences of it are expressly mentioned by Moses, and the 
other Prophets, only as a }{\i\f0 temporary thing,}{\f0  and what was to be succeeded by an effectual repentance, and perpetual obedience, and prosperity.
\par 
\par Among others, let the following prophecy of Isaiah (in which the future security of Israel is compared to the secur
ity of the world from a second deluge) be considered, and let any impartial person say, whether the language does not necessarily lead those who believe the Old Testament, to the expectation of a much more durable state of Glory, and Happiness, than has, 
as yet, fallen to the lot of the posterity of Abraham.
\par 
\par Is. 54, 7. \ldblquote  For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but. with everlasting kindness will I have mercy
 on thee, saith the Lord, thy Redeemer. For this is as the waters of Noah unto me. For as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, go have I sworn, that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall
 [or \ldblquote may\rdblquote ] depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee.\emdash 
 All thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace 
of thy children. In righteousness shalt thou be established. Thou shalt be far from oppression, for thou shalt not fear; and from terror, for it shall not come nigh thee. No weapon formed against thee, shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise again
st thee in judgment, thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Here, as also in Moses, and other Prophets, an establishment in righteousness is promised to the Israelites, such as shall secure their future prosperity; and this promise has }{\i\f0 not yet}{\f0 
 been fulfilled. The promise of future virtue as connected with their future happiness, is also clearly expressed in Jer. ch. iii. 18.
\par 
\par Had the Jewish nation become }{\i\f0 extinct,}{\f0  or likely to 
become so, it might, with some plausibility, have been said by Christians, that the purposes of God concerning them were actually fulfilled, and, therefore, that the words of the promise must have had some other signification than that which was most obvi
ous. But the Jews are as much a distinct people as they ever were, and therefore seem reserved for some future strange destination.
\par 
\par On the whole, it must be allowed, that the settlement of Israel in the land of Canaan, foretold with such emphasis by the Pr
ophets, is a settlement which has not yet taken place, but may take place in that period so frequently, and so emphatically, distinguished by the title of \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 the latter days ;\rdblquote }{\f0  and }{\i\f0 therefore }{\f0 
that whatever is said of Jewish customs, or modes of worship in \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 the latter days?\rdblquote }{\f0  is a }{\i\f0 proof}{\f0  of the meant restoration of their }{\i\f0 ancient religious rites.
\par 
\par }{\f0 That the institutions of the Mosaic Law are to be continued on the restoration of the Jews to their own land after their utter dispersion, is asserted by Moses himself
 in one of the passages already quoted; but is more clearly expressed by the subsequent Prophets. In some of their prophecies, particular mention is made of the observance of Jewish festivals, and of sacrifices; and in Ezechiel we find a description of a 
m
agnificent Temple, which being closely connected with his prophecy of the future happy state of the Israelites in their own land, cannot be understood of any other than a Temple which is then, according to the Hebrew Prophets, to be reared with greater ma
gnificence than ever. Mention is also made of \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 the Glory of the Lord,\rdblquote }{\f0  or that effulgent Shechinah which was the symbol of the divine presence, filling this Temple, as it did that of Solomon.
\par 
\par Ezech. xliii. 1, &c. \ldblquote  Afterward he brought me to the gate, eve
n the gate that looketh toward the East; and behold the glory of the Lord came from the way of the East, and his voice was like the noise of many waters, and the Earth shined with his Glory.\emdash 
And the Glory of the Lord came into the house by the way of the gate, whose prospect is toward the East. So the Spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court, and behold the Glory of the Lord filled the house.\emdash 
 And he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my Throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel }{\i\f0 for ever,}{\f0  and my holy name shall the house of Israel no more defile,\rdblquote  &c.

\par 
\par Towards the end of the same chapter we read an account of the }{\i\f0 dedication }{\f0 of this new Temple by sacrifices; and particular directions are given in the succeeding chapters for the Priests, and for the }{\i\f0 Prince.}{\f0 
 If, therefore, there be any truth in these prophecies, the Jews are not only to return to their own country, and to be distinguished among the nations, but are to rebuild the Temple, and to restore the ancient worship.
\par 
\par Having proved that the Old Testament declares the perpetuity of the Mosaic Law, I proceed, 2dly, to prove that it is declared to be perpetual by Jesus himself.
\par 
\par But before I adduce my proofs, I beg leave to premise, that when any Law is }{\i\f0 solemnly enacted,}{\f0  we expect that the }{\i\f0 abrogation}{\f0  of it should be }{\i\f0 equally solemn,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 express,}{\f0 
 in order that no room for dispute may remain upon the subject. Accordingly, it is the custom, I believe, in all countries, not to make any }{\i\f0 new}{\f0  Law, }{\i\f0 contradictory}{\f0  to another before subsisting, without }{\i\f0 
a previous express abrogation}{\f0  of the }{\i\f0 old}{\f0  one. And certainly it appears to me a strange notion to suppose, that the elaborate and noble Law given from mount Sinai amidst circumstances unexampled, 
awful, and tremendously magnificent, and believed to have been declared by the voice of God to be a perpetual and everlasting Code, should vanish, perish, and be annihilated by the }{\i\f0 mere dictum}{\f0  of twelve fishermen!!
\par 
\par But the fact is otherwise, for Jesus was so far from teaching the }{\i\f0 abrogation}{\f0  of that law, that he expressly says\emdash \rdblquote 
 Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled.\rdblquote 
 This is a most explicit declaration that not the smallest punctilio in the law of Moses was }{\i\f0 intended }{\f0 to be set aside by the Gospel. Nay more, he expressly commanded his disciples to the same purpose\emdash  \ldblquote 
The Scribes and Pharisees (says he,) sit in Moses\rquote  seat; all therefore whatsoever they command you, that }{\i\f0 observe,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 do.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 It is said in answer to this by Christian Divines, that his discourse relates to things of a }{\i\f0 moral nature,}{\f0  and that he only meant, that no part of the }{\i\f0 Moral Law}{\f0  was to be abolished. But besides that the expression is }{
\i\f0 general, }{\f0 there could be no occasion to make so solemn a declaration against what he could not have been suspected of intending, viz. of }{\i\f0 abolishing the moral law. }{\f0 He 
seems in his discourse to have had in view the .additions that had been made to the law. These he sets aside, but no part of the original law itself.
\par 
\par }\pard \widctlpar\tx4590\adjustright {\f0 It has also been urged that by }{\i\f0 fulfilling,}{\f0   may be meant such an }{\i\f0 accomplishment}{\f0  of it as would imply the }{\i\f0 superseding}{\f0 
 of it when the purposes for which it was instituted should be answered. To silence this explication it will be sufficient to produce a few out of many passages of the New Testament where the term}{\i\f0  fulfil}{\f0  occurs in connexion with the term }{
\i\f0 law. }{\f0 Thus Paul says, Gal. v. 14, \ldblquote  All the law is }{\i\f0 fulfilled}{\f0  in one word, even in this, thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,\rdblquote  and again. Rom. xiii. 8, \ldblquote  He that loveth another, hath }{\i\f0 
fulfilled  the law.\rdblquote }{\f0  But certainly, notwithstanding this }{\i\f0 fulfilment}{\f0  of the }{\i\f0 moral law,}{\f0  it remains in as full force as ever.
\par }\pard \widctlpar\adjustright {\f0 
\par The Apostles understood Jesus to mean as we have asserted. For it is evident from the Acts, that the Christians at Jerusalem were zealous in attachment to the law of Moses ; this is evident from their surprise
 at Peter's conduct with regard to Cornelius ; and in the dispute about imposing circumcision upon the }{\i\f0 Gentiles; observe}{\f0  there was no dispute about its being obligatory upon }{\i\f0 Jews.
\par 
\par }{\f0 Paul was indeed vehemently accused of teaching a contrary doctrine, as we find in the history of the transactions respecting him in his last journey to Jerusalem. Acts xxi. 21,\rdblquote 
 They (i. e. the Christians) are informed of thee (says James to Paul) that thou teachest all the Jews which are among the Gentiles, to }{\i\f0 forsake Moses,}{\f0  saying that they }{\i\f0 ought not}{\f0 
 to circumscise their children, neither to walk after the custom.\rdblquote   Here James gives Paul to understand that he considered the report as }{\i\f0 a calumny,}{\f0  and accordingly, to convince the Jewish Christians that it was }{\i\f0 
a false report,}{\f0  he advises Paul to be at charges with some Jewish Christians, who were under a vow of }{\i\f0 Nazaritism,}{\f0 
 (which is an instance in point to prove that the first Christians kept the law,) and thus publicly manifest that he himself \ldblquote  walked orderly, and kept the law.\rdblquote  Pau
l complies with this advice, and purified himself in the temple, and did what was done in like cases by the strictest Jews. He also circumcised Timothy, who was a convert to Christianity, }{\i\f0 because}{\f0  he was the son of a }{\i\f0 Jewish Mother.}{
\f0  And he solemnly declared in open court. Acts xxv. 8, \ldblquote  Against }{\i\f0 the law}{\f0  of the Jews, neither against }{\i\f0 the Temple,}{\f0  have I offended }{\i\f0 any thing at all,\rdblquote }{\f0 
 and again, to the Jews at Rome, Acts xxviii., 7, he assures them that \ldblquote  he had done nothing against the people, or the }{\i\f0 customs of the fathers.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 But some men will say,\rdblquote  did not Paul expressly teach the abrogation of the law, in his Epistles, especially in that to the Galatians ?\rdblquote  I answer, he undoubtedly }{\i\f0 did;}{\f0 
 and in so doing he contradicted the Old Testament, his master Jesus, the twelve Apostles, and }{\i\f0 himself}{\f0 
 too.  But how can this be? I answer, it is none of my concern to reconcile the conduct of Paul; or to defend his equivocations. It is pretty clear, that he did not dare to preach this doctrine at Jerusalem. He confined this \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 hidden 
wisdom,\rdblquote }{\f0  to the Gentiles. To the Jews he became as a Jew; and to the uncircumcised as one uncircumcised, he was \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 all things to all men!\rdblquote }{\f0  and for this conduct he gives you his reason, viz. \ldblquote 
 that he was determined at }{\i\f0 any rate}{\f0  to }{\i\f0 gain some.\rdblquote }{\f0  If this be doub
le dealing, dissimulation, and equivocation, I cannot help it; it is none of my concern, I leave it to the Commentators, and the reconciliators, the disciples of }{\i\f0 Surenhusius ;}{\f0  let them look to it.; perhaps they can hunt up some \ldblquote 
 traditionary rules of interpretation among the Jews,\rdblquote  that will help them to explain the matter.
\par 
\par Lastly, it has been said that there was no occasion for Jesus, or his Apostles to be very explicit with respect to the abolition of the laws of Moses, since the Temple was to be soon destroyed, when the Jewish worship would cease of course.
\par 
\par This argument, flimsy }{\i\f0 as}{\f0  it is, is nevertheless the }{\i\f0 instar omnium of}{\f0  the Christian Divines to prove the abolishment of this Law: (for the other arguments adduced by them as }{\i\f0 prophecies}{\f0  of it from the
 1 ch. of Isaiah, and some of the Psalms, are nothing, to the purpose; they being merely declarations of God, that he preferred obedience in the weightier matters of the Law; Justice, Mercy, and Holiness, to }{\i\f0 ceremonial}{\f0 
 observances; and that repentance was of more avail with him than offering thousands of rams, and fed beasts,) and this argument like so many others, when weighed in the balance, will be \ldblquote  found wanting.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par For, as the destruction of the Temple by }{\i\f0 Nebuchadnezzar}{\f0  certainly did }{\i\f0 not}{\f0  abolish the Law, so neither did the destruction by Titus, do it. And as it would be }{\i\f0 notoriously absurd}{\f0  to maintain the }{\i\f0 first,}{\f0 
 so it is equally so to maintain the }{\i\f0 last, position.}{\f0  Besides, a very considerable part of that Law can }{\i\f0 be,}{\f0  and for these }{\i\f0 seventeen hundred years, has been}{\f0  kept }{\i\f0 without}{\f0 
 the Temple. As for example, circumcision, distinction of meats, and many others. And when, if ever, they shall return to their own land, and rebuild the Temple, they will then, according to the Old Testament, observe }{\i\f0 the whole,}{\f0  and w
ith greater splendour than ever.
\par 
\par 
\par CHAPTER XII.
\par 
\par ON THE CHARACTER }{\i\f0 OF}{\f0  PAUL AND HIS MANNER OF REASONING.
\par 
\par 
\par As Christians lay great stress upon their argument for the truth of their Religion, derived from the supposed miraculous conversion of }{\i\f0 Paul;}{\f0  and since 
almost the whole of Systematic Christianity is built upon the foundation of the Epistles ascribed to him, we shall pay a little more attention to his character and writings.
\par 
\par Paul was evidently a man of no small capacity, a fiery temper, great subtilty, and considerably well versed in Jewish Traditionary, and Cabbalistic Learning, and not unacquainted with the principles of the Philosophy called the \ldblquote  Oriental.
\rdblquote  He is said by Luke to have been converted to Christianity by a splendid apparition of Jesus, who struck him to the ground by the glory of his appearance. But by the Jews and }{\i\f0 the Nazarene Christians,}{\f0 
 he is represented as having been converted to Christianity from a different cause. They say that being a man of tried abilities and of some note, he demanded the High Priest\rquote 
s daughter in marriage, and being refused, his rash and rageful temper, and a desire of revenge, drove him to join the \ldblquote  sect of the Nazarenes,\rdblquote  at that time beginning to become troublesome to the Sanhedrim. However this may be, whethe
r he became a Christian from }{\i\f0 conviction,}{\f0  or from }{\i\f0 ambition;}{\f0  it is certain from the Acts that he always was considered by the Jewish Christians, as a }{\i\f0 suspected}{\f0  character; and it is evident that he taught a }{\i\f0 
different  doctrine}{\f0  from that promulgated by the twe
lve apostles. And this was the true cause of the great difficulty he was evidently under of keeping steady to him, his Gentile converts. For it is evident from the Epistles to the Galatians, and the Corinthians, that }{\i\f0 the Jewish Christians }{\f0 
represented Paul to them as not \ldblquote sound in the Faith,\rdblquote  but as teaching a different doctrine from that of the Twelve, and so influential were these representations, that Paul had the greatest difficulty in keeping them to his System.

\par 
\par That there were two }{\i\f0 Parties,}{\f0  or }{\i\f0 Schools}{\f0  in the first Christian church, viz. the adherents of the }{\i\f0 Apostles,}{\f0  and the Disciples of }{\i\f0 Paul,}{\f0 
 is evident from the New Testament, and has been fully, and unanswerably }{\i\f0 proved}{\f0  by the learned Semler, the greatest scholar certainly in Christian Antiquities, tha
t ever lived. The knowledge of this secret, accounts for the different conduct of Paul when among his }{\i\f0 Gentile}{\f0  converts, from that which he pursued when with the apostles at }{\i\f0 Jerusalem.}{\f0 
 He had a difficult part to act, and he managed admirably. He  was indeed, as he says, himself, \ldblquote  all things to all men,\rdblquote  a Jew with the Jews, and as one uncircumcised among the uncircumcised. To the Jews, he asserted, that he 
\ldblquote  taught nothing contrary to the Law, and the Prophets,\rdblquote  and when brought before the Sanhedrim for tea
ching otherwise than he said, he dexterously got himself out of tribulation, by throwing a bone of contention among the Council, and setting his Judges together by the ears. \ldblquote  And when }{\i\f0 Paul perceived}{\f0 
 that the one part (of the Council) were }{\i\f0 Sadducees,}{\f0  and the other, }{\i\f0 Pharisees,}{\f0  he cried out in the Council: Brethren, }{\i\f0 I am a Pharisee,}{\f0  and the son of }{\i\f0 a Pharisee;}{\f0  concerning }{\i\f0 
the hope of the resurrection of the dead, I}{\f0  am }{\i\f0 now judged.}{\f0  And when he had said this, }{\i\f0 a dissension}{\f0  arose between the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the multitude was divided. For the }{\i\f0 Sadducees}{\f0 
 say there is }{\i\f0 no resurrection,}{\f0  neither angel, nor spirit; but the }{\i\f0 Pharisees}{\f0  confess both. And there was }{\i\f0 a great cry,}{\f0  and the Scribes that were on the part of the Pharisees, arose and }{\i\f0 strove,}{\f0  saying, 
\ldblquote We find no evil in this man\rdblquote  &c. This, indeed, was a masterly manoeuvre, and produced the desired effect; and Paul by this shows his knowledge of }{\i\f0 the human heart,}{\f0 
 in trusting to make his Judges forget what he was accused of, by making an appeal to their }{\i\f0 sectarian passions.}{\f0  For, in truth, he }{\i\f0 was not}{\f0  accused concerning his opinion about \ldblquote 
 the hope, and the resurrection of the dead,\rdblquote  but for the following cause, as his accusers vociferated (in the xxi. ch.) when they seized him in the Temple, \ldblquote Men of Israel, Help! }{\i\f0 This }{\f0 
is the man, who teacheth all men every where against, the people, and }{\i\f0 the Law,}{\f0  and this place.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par These strokes of character enable us to understand the man; and I shall now go into the consideration of some of the arguments he has deduced from passa
ges in the Old Testament in support of his opinions; after premising, that the truth of the story of the manner of his conversion depends entirely upon }{\i\f0 his own assertion;}{\f0  and whether his credibility be }{\i\f0 absolutely}{\f0 
 unimpeachable, can be easily determined by 
an impartial consideration of the history of his conduct already mentioned. I will only add upon this subject, that in telling the story of his conversion, he ought to have had a better memory; for in telling it once in xxvi. ch. of Acts, he says, in desc
ribing his miraculous vision, that \ldblquote  those that were with me, saw indeed the light, and were afraid, but }{\i\f0 heard not}{\f0  the words of him that spake to me;\rdblquote 
 and thus he directly contradicts the story of it recorded in Acts ix., where it is said, \ldblquote that the men who journeyed with him stood speechless, }{\i\f0 hearing the voice,}{\f0  but seeing no one.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par In the 9th chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, v. 24, he thus proves; that the Old Testament prophecied of the conversion of the Gentiles, to the Gospel\emdash  \ldblquote Even us whom he hath 
called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles, as he saith also in }{\i\f0 Hosea \ldblquote }{\f0  I will call them my people, which were not my people; and her beloved, which was not beloved. And it shall come to }{\i\f0 pass,}{\f0 
 that in the place where it was said unto them, you are not my people, there shall they be called the sons of the living God.\rdblquote \emdash Is not this to the purpose ? yet, in applying this passage to the Gentiles, Paul has }{\i\f0 wilfully, }{\f0 
(yes }{\i\f0 wilfully,}{\f0  for Paul was a learned man, and knew better) }{\i\f0 perverted}{\f0  the original fro
m its proper reference, and has passed upon his simple converts., who did not know so much of the Jewish Scriptures, as he did, a prophecy relating entirely to the }{\i\f0 Jews,}{\f0  as referring to the }{\i\f0 Gentiles ! !}{\f0  By turning to }{\i\f0 
Hosea,}{\f0  Reader, you will find this to be verily the case ; here is the passage, \ldblquote  Then said God, call his name (Hosea\rquote s son) Loammi, for }{\i\f0 ye}{\f0  (the Israelites) are not my people, and I will not be your God, yet the number 
}{\i\f0 of the children of Israel}{\f0  shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured, nor numbered. And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto }{\i\f0 them, ye are}{\f0  not my people, there shall it be said unto }{
\i\f0 them,}{\f0  ye are the sons of the living God.\rdblquote   Hosea chapter i
\par 
\par \ldblquote Again v. 33. \ldblquote  As it is written, Behold I lay in Zion a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, and every one who believeth in him shall not be  ashamed.\rdblquote   Here Paul has }{\i\f0 pieced two passages together,}{\f0 
 which in the originals are disconnected. For in the 8th chapter of Isaiah it is written, \ldblquote  Sanctify the  Lord of Hosts himself, and let }{\i\f0 him}{\f0  be your fear, and let }{\i\f0 him}{\f0  be your dread. And }{\i\f0 he}{\f0 
 shall be for a sanctuary ; but for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offence, to both the houses of Israel; for a gin, and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.\rdblquote  And in the 28th chapter it is written, \ldblquote 
 therefore, thus saith the Lord God, behold I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation, he }{\i\f0 that believeth }{\f0 shall not be ashamed,\rdblquote  (or disappointed) Here \ldblquote yo
u see, reader, that he jams two distant passages together no ways related; and alters some words, and applies them to }{\i\f0 Jesus,}{\f0  with whom, it appears from the context of Isaiah, they have no concern.
\par 
\par Ch. x. v. 6. \ldblquote The scripture saith, \lquote say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into Heaven }{\i\f0 ?}{\f0  (that is, that he may bring down Jesus from above.) Again, \lquote who shall descend into the abyss ?\rquote 
 (that is, that he may bring up Jesus from the dead.) But what saith it ? \lquote  The word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart.\rquote 
 (that is the word of Faith which we speak.) For if thou confess Jesus with thy mouth, and believe in thine heart  that God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved.\rdblquote  Here you will see another instance of misapplication of Scripture by Pa
ul, in order to dazzle the eyes of his simple and credulous converts, for let any one took at the place in the Scripture whence the quotation is taken, arid he will immediately see the inapplicability of the words, and the adulteration of those of the ori
ginal, in order to make them apply. For the Scripture quoted speaks of, and refers }{\i\f0 to penitence,}{\f0  and. not at all about believing on, or bringing down Jesus from Heaven, or up from the dead; for here are the words, Deut. 30.\emdash   
\ldblquote If thou be converted to the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy mind.\rdblquote \emdash  Immediately is subjoined\emdash  \ldblquote 
For this Law which I command you this day is not far from thee ; neither is it afar off. It is not in Heaven, that thou shouldst say, who shall ascend for us into Heaven, that he may bring it unto us, and declare it to us that we might do it,\rdblquote 
 &c. The sense of the whole is, that God wills us to repent of sin ; and that you may know when you have sinned, you have only to look at }{\i\f0 his Law,}{\f0  which is not in Heaven, nor afar off, b
ut is put in your own hands, and is perfectly familiar with your heart, and lips.
\par 
\par 1 Cor , ch. v. 1. Paul accuses one of the Christians of the church of Corinth of the crime of incest, because he had married his step-mother, and orders them to excommunicate him. But Paul, in all his Epistles and teachings to }{\i\f0 the Gentiles,}{\f0 
 pronounced them }{\i\f0 free}{\f0  from the Law of Moses. Wherefore then for the violation of one of those Laws interdicting such a marriage, does he so vehemently, blame them? Such a marriage is not fo
rbidden in the Gospel: it was forbidden to them no where in the Scriptures but in the Mosaic Code. Therefore, Paul must have founded his judgment against the criminal upon the }{\i\f0 dictum}{\f0  of that law in such cases. Paul puts the man under }{
\i\f0 a curse;}{\f0  and it is the Mosaic Law which says, Deut. 27, \ldblquote  Cursed is he who lieth with his father\rquote s wife.\rdblquote  It seems, therefore, that Jesus did }{\i\f0 not}{\f0  deliver his followers from \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 
the curse of the law,\rdblquote }{\f0  as Paul taught them it }{\i\f0 did}{\f0  in Gal. iii. 13.
\par 
\par 1 Cor. ch. x.:\emdash   \ldblquote And let us not pollute ourselves with fornication, as some of them were polluted, and fell in one day to the number of }{\i\f0 twenty -three}{\f0  thousand.\rdblquote  Here is a blunder, for it is written \ldblquote  }{
\i\f0 twenty-four}{\f0  thousand.\rdblquote \emdash Num. 25.
\par 
\par Gal. iii., 13, Paul says, \ldblquote  Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us; for it is written, cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree.\rdblquote 
 What he says of the Christ, or the Messiah redeeming from the curses written in the law, that by no means agrees with truth; for no Jew can be 
freed from the curses of the law, but by repenting of his sins, and becoming obedient to it. And in alledging the words \ldblquote  cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree,\rdblquote  from Deut. xxi., he, as usual, applies them irrelevantly.
\par 
\par Paul says, Gal. iii, }{\i\f0 10:\emdash }{\f0   \ldblquote For as many as are of the works of the law, }{\i\f0 are}{\f0  under the curse; for it is written, Deut. xxvii. 26, \lquote 
 Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things written in the book of the law to do them.\rquote \rdblquote  And he interprets this to mean that all }{\i\f0 mankind,}{\f0  Jews an
d Gentile, are liable to damnation, (except those who are saved by faith) because no man ever }{\i\f0 did}{\f0  continue in }{\i\f0 all}{\f0  things written in the law.  Now, in the first place I would observe, that Paul has inserted the word \ldblquote  
}{\i\f0 all\rdblquote  in}{\f0  the passage he quotes from Deuteronomy, (in the original of which it is }{\i\f0 not)}{\f0  in order to make it support his system; for }{\i\f0 the whole}{\f0 
 of his argument is built upon this one surreptitiously inserted word. 2. The words according to the original are simply these:\emdash  \ldblquote Cursed is he that continueth not the words of this law to do them;\rdblquote  i. e.,\emdash 
He who disobeys, or neglects to fulfil the commands of the law, shall be under the curse denounced upon the disobedient. But who would conclude from this that repentance would not remove the curse ? Does not 
God expressly declare in the xxx. ch. of Deut., that if they }{\i\f0 repent,}{\f0  the curses written }{\i\f0 shall}{\f0 
 be removed from them ? And have we not innumerable instances recorded in the Old Testament, of sinners, and transgressors of this very law, received to pardon and
 favour, upon repentance and amendment ? So that this argument founded upon an unwarrantable undeniable interpolation, and supported by bad logic, is every way b}{\i\f0 ad,}{\f0  and insulting to God and his (by Paul acknowledged) word.
\par 
\par Gal ch. iii. 16:\emdash   \ldblquote To Abraham, and }{\i\f0 his seed}{\f0  were the promises made, He saith not \lquote  and to }{\i\f0 seeds,\rquote }{\f0  (as of roomy) but as of }{\i\f0 one, \lquote }{\f0  and to thy }{\i\f0 seed,\rquote  }{\f0 
which is Christ.\rdblquote  Here is an argument which one would think too far-fetched, even for Paul; and it is built on a perversion of a passage from Genesis, which Paul, bold as he was in these matters, certainly would not have }{\i\f0 ventured,}{\f0 
 if he had not the most assured confidence in the blinking credulity of his Galatian converts.  His argument in this place is drawn from the use of the word }{\i\f0 \ldblquote seed\rdblquote }{\f0  in the }{\i\f0 singular}{\f0 
 number, in the passage of Genesis, from whence he quotes. And because the word seed is in the }{\i\f0 singular}{\f0  number, fag tells the }{\i\f0 \ldblquote foolish Galatians,\rdblquote }{\f0  as he justly calls them, that this \ldblquote  seed
\rdblquote  must mean }{\i\f0 one individual}{\f0  (and not many,) \ldblquote which,\rdblquote  says he, \ldblquote is }{\i\f0 Christ.\rdblquote  }{\f0 Now, let us look at the xv. ch. of Gen., from whence he quotes, and we shall see the force of this }{
\i\f0 singular}{\f0  argument, derived from the use of the }{\i\f0 singular }{\f0 number. \ldblquote  And He (God) brought him (Abraham) forth abroad, and said. Look now towards heaven, and tell }{\i\f0 the stars}{\f0 
 if thou be able to number them, and He said unto him, so }{\i\f0 shall thy seed be.\emdash }{\f0 And He said, know of a surety that }{\i\f0 thy seed}{\f0  shall be a stranger in a land that is not }{\i\f0 theirs,}{\f0  and they shall afflict }{\i\f0 
them,}{\f0  &c., afterwards }{\i\f0 they}{\f0  shall come out with great substance.\emdash  In that same day the Lord made a covenant with Abraham, saying, unto }{\i\f0 thy }{\f0 seed have I given this land,\rdblquote 
 &c. Again, ch. xxii., God said to Abraham by his Angel, \ldblquote  I will multiply }{\i\f0 thy seed}{\f0  as the }{\i\f0 stars}{\f0  of heaven, and as the }{\i\f0 sand }{\f0 
which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his (or its) enemies, and in }{\i\f0 thy}{\f0  seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my voice! Reader, what do you think now of Paul\rquote 
s argument from the use of the }{\i\f0 singular}{\f0  number ? Which is most to be admired? His offering such an argument to the Galatians; (for being a learned man, he certainly knew that the argument was nought,) or }{\i\f0 their }{\f0 
credulity in receiving  such reasoning as }{\i\f0 Divine? }{\f0  Really, I fear there is  }{\i\f0 some reason for}{\f0  admitting as true what Celsus maliciously says of the simplicity of the Primitive Christians, if Paul could with impunity feed his 
\ldblquote spiritual babes\rdblquote  with such pap as this!
\par 
\par I intended to have concluded this subject, by bringing under exa
mination some of the arguments and quotations in the Epistle to the Hebrews; but upon looking over that Epistle, and contemplating my task, I confess I shrink from it. That Epistle is so replete with daring, ridiculous, and impious applications of the wor
d
s of the Old Testament, that I am glad to omit it; and I think after the specimens which have been already brought forward, that my reader is quite as much satiated as myself. I will, therefore, bring forward only one quotation, which is alledged in that 
Epistle to prove the abolition of the law of Moses; and as for the rest, I content myself with referring those who want to know more of it, to the pieces written by the celebrated Dr. Priestley upon Paul\rquote 
s arguments in general, and those in that Epistle in 
particular, preserved in his Theological Repository, where he will see absurdity in reasoning, and, something worse, in quotation, exposed in a masterly manner. Indeed, some learned Christians are so sensible of the insuperable difficulties attending ever
y attempt to reconcile that Epistle to the Doctrine of inspiration, or even to common sense, that they avoid the trouble, by denying that Paul could have been the author of such a work, and attribute it to the }{\i\f0  same,}{\f0  or a }{\i\f0 similar,}{
\f0  hand, with that which forged the marvellous Epistle ascribed to Barnabas.
\par 
\par The quotation brought forward in the Epistle to the Hebrews, to prove the abrogation of the Mosaic Law, and the substitution of a new one, is taken }{\i\f0 from Jer.}{\f0  xxxi.  31, &c.\emdash  \ldblquote Behold the days come saith the L
ord, that I will make a }{\i\f0 new covenant}{\f0 
 with the house of Judah. Not according to the covenant which I made with they fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, (which my covenant they brake, although I was an hus
band unto them, saith the Lord.) But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel. After those days saith the Lord, I will put }{\i\f0 my law}{\f0  in their inward parts, and }{\i\f0 write it in their hearts;}{\f0 
 and will be their God, and they shall be my p
eople; and they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, saying know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord, for I will forgive their iniquity, and will remember their sins no more.
\rdblquote  Upon this passage the author of the Epistle observes \ldblquote  in that he saith \lquote a }{\i\f0 new}{\f0  covenant,\rquote  he hath made the first old;\rdblquote  and he sagely concludes \ldblquote  now that which decayeth, and waxeth }{
\i\f0 old,}{\f0  is ready to }{\i\f0 vanish away !!\rdblquote }{\f0  and takes the quotation to be a }{\i\f0 prophecy}{\f0  of the }{\i\f0 abolition}{\f0  of the old law, and the introduction of the Gospel Dispensation.
\par 
\par Now, I would observe on his reasoning, in the first place, that, allowing for a moment his interpretation of the prophecy to be correct, (i. e., that it signifies the abolishment of the }{\i\f0 old,}{\f0  and an introduction of a }{\i\f0 new}{\f0 
 law) the prophecy, at any rate, cannot refer to Jesus, or the Gospel; for so far from having been fulfilled in the time of Jesus, or his Apostles, it has not been fulfilled }{\i\f0 to this day ;}{\f0  for certainly God has not yet made a }{\i\f0 
new covenant}{\f0  with the Jews, to whom the prophecy refers, nor has he yet \ldblquote  put his law in their hearts;\rdblquote  nor \ldblquote  caused them to walk in it;\rdblquote  neither has he yet \ldblquote 
 forgiven their sins, or forgotten their iniquities,\rdblquote  since they are }{\i\f0 even now}{\f0  suffering, the consequences of them.
\par 
\par I will now retract what I granted, and assert that the prophet did not mean an abolition of the Mosaic, and the introduction of a new, law; for though the prophet speaks of a new }{\i\f0 covenant,}{\f0  he says nothing of a new }{\i\f0 law; }{\f0 
but on the contrary, asserts that this new covenant would be effectual to make them obey the law. God promised to put his law within their hearts (not }{\i\f0 out of remembrance,}{\f0 
 as the catechisms say;) and in this alone this covenant differs from the one entered into at Mount Sinai. For, then, though the law was given them, it was not \ldblquote  put within their hearts,\rdblquote 
 but they were apt, to their own controul, to obey it, or not, being assured, however, that happiness should be the reward of obedience, and death and excision the pu
nishment for revolt and disobedience. And you will moreover observe, that, notwithstanding what is here called a new covenant, nothing is here said of the }{\i\f0 abrogation}{\f0  of any }{\i\f0 former}{\f0  covenant, or constitution, or of any new }{
\i\f0 terms,}{\f0  that would be required by Go
d on the part of the Israelites.   The prophet, by expanding his idea, sufficiently explains his whole meaning, which is evidently this, viz.: That God would make a new, and solemn promise to the Israelites, that they should be no more out of favor with h
i
m; that their hearts would be hereafter so right with God, that in consequence of it, they  would continue in the quiet possession of their country to the end of time; and all this is intimated by Moses, in the quotation from Deuteronomy, quoted in the la
st chapter.
\par 
\par Thus is the passage perfectly consistent with those in the Old Testament, which affirm, (whether right or wrong is not my concern) the perfection and perpetuity of the Mosaic Law. \ldblquote  Remember,\rdblquote 
 are the last words of the last of the prophets, Malachi,\emdash  \ldblquote Remember the Law of Moses, my servant which I commanded unto him in Horeb, with the Statutes, and Judgments.\rdblquote  Also in the Psalms:\emdash  \ldblquote 
The Law of the Lord is }{\i\f0 perfect,}{\f0  converting the soul. The Testimony  of the Lord is faithful, bringing wisdom to the simple. The Precepts of the Lord are }{\i\f0 right,}{\f0  rejoicing the heart, and enlightening the eyes.\rdblquote  
\ldblquote  The works of his hands are Truth, and Judgment. All his Precepts are sure. They }{\i\f0 stand fast for ever and ever:}{\f0  being done in Truth and Uprightness.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par CHAPTER XIII.
\par 
\par EXAMINATION OF SOME DOCTRINES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT DERIVED FBOM THE CABALLA, THE ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY, AND THE TENETS OF ZOROASTER.
\par 
\par I have said in the preceding chapter, that Paul was well versed in Cabbalistic Learning, and not unacquainted with the principles of the Philosophy styled \ldblquote  the Oriental;\rdblquote 
 and to prove and exemplify this assertion, is the subject and intention of this chapter. None but the learned know, how much of Systematic Christianity is derived from the Cabbalism of the Jews; the Religi
on of the Magi of Persia; and the Philosophy of the Bramins of Indostan. I shall attempt to lay open these Theological Arcana, and make them known to those who ought to know what they have been kept in ignorance of. 
\par 
\par Many of my readers have, no doubt, frequently puzzled themselves over these words of Paul\rquote s, Eph. v. 30 :\emdash   \ldblquote For we are members of his (Christ\rquote 
s) body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Because of this, a man shall leave his father, and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This mystery is great, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church.\rdblquote 
 This passage exemplifies the connexion between Christ and the Church, by that which subsists between a man and his wife; and this Paul calls \ldblquote  a great mystery;\rdblquote  and it no dou
bt must be a very mysterious passage to all those who are unacquainted with the cabbalistic notion to which it alludes, and refers. To illustrate the passage, and to prove that Paul raised his Cabbalism with his religion, I shall set down here the note of
 Dr. Whitby, the Christian Commentator, upon the text of Paul.
\par 
\par \ldblquote  The learned Dr. Allix saith, The first match between Adam and Eve, was a type of that between Christ and his Church; and in this, saith he, the Apostle follows the Jewish notions.  The Jews s
ay, the mystery of Adam, is the mystery of the Messiah, who is the Bridegroom of the Church. These two persons, therefore, confirm the observation of Munster, that the creation of the woman from the rib of the man, was made by the Jews to signify the marr
iage of the celestial man who is blessed, or of the Messiah, with the Church; whence the Apostle applies the very words which Adam said concerning Eve his spouse, to the Church, who is the spouse of Christ; saying,  \ldblquote 
 for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.\rdblquote  For the explanation of these words, take what follows :\emdash  \ldblquote The profoundest of the }{\i\f0 Jewish}{\f0 
 Divines, whom they now call Cabbalists, having such a notion as }{\i\f0 this}{\f0  among them, }{\i\f0 that sensible things are but an imitation of things above, }{\f0 co
nceived from thence, that there was an original pattern of love and union, which is between a man and his wife in this world. This being expressed by the kindness of Tipheret and Malchut, which are the names they give to the invisible Bridegroom and Bride
 in the upper world. And this Tiphiret, or the celestial Adam, is so called in opposition to the terrestrial Adam; as }{\i\f0 Malchut also (i.}{\f0  e., the kingdom) they call by the name of }{\i\f0 Chinnereth Israel }{\f0 
the Congregation of Israel, who is, they say, united to the celestial Adam as Eve was to the terrestrial.\rdblquote  So that in sum, they seem to say the same that Paul doth, when he tells us, that \ldblquote 
marriage is a great mystery, but he speaks concerning  Christ and his Church.\rdblquote  For the marriage of Tipheret and }{\i\f0 Malchuth,}{\f0  is the marriage of Christ, \ldblquote the Lord from Heaven,\rdblquote  (\ldblquote 
the first man was of the Earth earthly, the second man is }{\i\f0 the Lord from Heaven,\rdblquote }{\f0  says Paul I Cor. xv.,) with his spouse the Church, which is the conjunction of Adam and Eve, and of all other men and women desce
nded from them. Origen also seems to have had some notion of the relation of this passage to Adam and Eve, when he speaks thus:\emdash  \ldblquote If any man deride us for using the example of Adam and Eve in these words, \lquote and Adam knew his wife,
\rquote  when we treat of the knowledge of God, let him consider these words\emdash  \lquote This is a great mystery.\rquote \rdblquote  Tertullian frequently alludes to the same thing, saying \emdash  \ldblquote 
This is a great sacrament, carnally in Adam, spiritually in Christ, because of the spiritual marriage between Christ and the Church.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Thus far Dr. Whitby, and the intelligent reader, who is acquainted with the dogmas and philosophy of Indostan, will not fail to see through this cloud, of words the origin of this analogy of Paul. The fact is, that in India and in Egypt, the Divi
ne creative power which produced all things and energizes in everything, was symbolized by the Phallus ; and to this day, in Hindostan, the operation of Diety upon matter is symbolized by images of the same; and in the darkest recesses of their Temples, w
hich none but the initiated were permitted to enter: the }{\i\f0 Phallus of stone}{\f0 
 is the solitary idol, before which the illuminated bowed. This symbol, though shameful and abominable, is yet looked upon in India with the profoundest veneration, and is not with the
m the occasion of shame or reproach. It is, however, a blasphemous abomination; and the marriage between Christ and the Church ought not to have been thus illustrated by Paul, who reproached the heathen mysteries as \ldblquote works of darkness,
\rdblquote  which mysteries, in fact, consisted principally in  exhibiting these symbols, and similar abominations.}{\i\f0 
\par 
\par }{\f0 But, it may be asked, what is the meaning of the other clause of the verse \emdash what could Paul mean by the strong language, \ldblquote We are members of his body? of his flesh, and of his bones?\rdblquote 
 Why, my reader, he meant, that Christians were really part of the body of Christ and if you desire to know How he imagined this union to be effected, I request you to see the 10th ch. of the 1st Epistle to the Corinthians, where at the 16th ve
rse he thus writes to them:\emdash \rdblquote 
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a participation of the blood of Christ? The loaf (according to the Greek original) which we break, is it not a participation of the body of Christ? for, Because the loaf is one, we,
 though many, are one body, for we all partake of that one loaf.\rdblquote  Again, ch. xi. 19, \ldblquote For he that eateth, and drinketh unworthily eateth and drinketh judgment to himself, not distinguishing (or discovering) the }{\i\f0 Lord\rquote 
s body;\rdblquote }{\f0  and in ch. xii. 27, he says to them, \ldblquote Ye are the body of Christ, and his members severally.\rdblquote  (See the original of these passages in Griesbach\rquote 
s Greek Testament.) Thus you see, reader, that Paul considered Christians \ldblquote  as members of his (Christ\rquote s) body, of his flesh, and of his bones,\rdblquote  because they partook of one }{\i\f0 loaf,}{\f0 
 which was the body of Christ. The Papists are in the right, and have been much slandered by the Protestants, for the doctrine of Transubstantiation, or at least the Real Presence, is as plainly taught in the New Testament, 
as the doctrine of the Atonement. You have seen what Paul believed upon this subject, and I shall corroborate the sense I put upon his words, by the words of Jesus, his master, and by quotations }{\i\f0 from}{\f0  the earliest Fathers.
\par 
\par Jesus says, John vi.\emdash  \ldblquote I am the living bread which came down from Heaven; if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread which I will give }{\i\f0 is my flesh,}{\f0  which I will give for the life of the world.
\rdblquote  The Jews, therefore, contended among themselves, saying, \ldblquote How can this man give us his flesh to eat?\rdblquote  Jesus, therefore, said unto them, \ldblquote Verily, verily, I say unto you, unless ye eat }{\i\f0 the flesh}{\f0 
 of the son of man, and drink }{\i\f0 his blood,}{\f0  ye have not life in you. He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For }{\i\f0 my flesh is verily food,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 
my blood is verily drink.}{\f0  He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, }{\i\f0 abideth in me,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 I in him.}{\f0  As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father, (here is an oath) so he likewise that }{\i\f0 eateth me}{
\f0  shall live by me.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par This strange doctrine was the faith of the Primitive Christians, as is well known to the learned Protestants, though they do not like to say so to their \ldblquote  weaker brethren.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Ignatius says, \ldblquote  There is one flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, and one cup in the unity of his blood;\rdblquote  and of certain heretics he says, \ldblquote they confess not the Eucharist to be }{\i\f0 the flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ.
\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 Justin Martyr, in his Apology, asserts that the consecrated bread \ldblquote is, }{\i\f0 some how or other, the flesh of Christ.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 In the dispute with Latimer about Transubstantiation, it is acknowledged by the most candid writers, that the Roman Catholics had much the advantage. It must have been so, where quotations from the Fathers were all
owed as arguments. For what answer can be made to the following extracts?\emdash \rdblquote  What a miracle is this! He who sits above with the Father, at the same }{\i\f0 instant, is handled}{\f0  by }{\i\f0 the hands of men.\rdblquote }{\f0 
 [Chrysostom.] Again, from the same, \ldblquote  That which is in the cup, is }{\i\f0 the. same}{\f0  which flowed from the side of Christ.\rdblquote  Again, \ldblquote  Because we abhor the eating of raw flesh; therefore, it }{\i\f0 appeareth bread,}{
\f0  though it }{\i\f0 be flesh.\rdblquote }{\f0  [Theophylact.] Or to this?\emdash   \ldblquote Christ was carried }{\i\f0 in his own hands,}{\f0  when he said }{\i\f0 \lquote this is my body.\rquote \rdblquote  }{\f0 [Austin,] Or to this ?\emdash  
\ldblquote We are taught, that when this nourishing food is consecrated, it becomes the }{\i\f0 body}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 blood of}{\f0  our Saviour.\rdblquote  [Justin Martyr.] Or, lastly, to this ? [from Ambrose]\emdash \rdblquote  It is bread }{\i\f0 
before}{\f0  consecration, but }{\i\f0 after}{\f0  that ceremony, it becomes the flesh of Christ.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Another doctrine which Paul derived from the Oriental Philosophy, and Which makes a great figure in his writings, is the notion, that moral corruption originates in the influxes of the body upon the mind.
\par 
\par \ldblquote It was one of the principal tenets of the Oriental Philosophy, that all evil resulted from }{\i\f0 matter,}{\f0  and its first founder appears to have argued in the following manner:\emdash  \ldblquote 
 There are many evils in the world, and men seem impelled of a natural instinct to the practice of those things 
which reason condemns.  But that eternal mind, from which all spirits derive their existence, must be inaccessible to all kinds of evil, and also of a most perfect and beneficent nature; therefore, the origin of these evils with which the world abounds, m
ust be sought }{\i\f0 somewhere else,}{\f0  than in the Deity. It cannot abide }{\i\f0 in him}{\f0  who is all perfection, and, therefore, it must be }{\i\f0 without}{\f0  him. Now, there is nothing }{\i\f0 without}{\f0  or beyond the Deity but }{\i\f0 
matter;}{\f0  therefore, }{\i\f0 matter }{\f0 is the centre and source of all }{\i\f0 evil,}{\f0  of }{\i\f0 all vice.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 One of the consequences they drew from this hypothesis was, that since All evil resulted from }{\i\f0 matter,}{\f0  the depravity of mankind arose from the pollution derived to the }{\i\f0 human soul,}{\f0  from its connexion with the }{\i\f0 
material body }{\f0 which it inhabits; and, 
therefore, the only means by which the mind could purify itself from the defilement, and liberate itself from the bondage imposed upon it by the body, was to emaciate and humble the body by frequent fasting, and to invigorate the mind to overcome and subd
ue it by retirement and contemplation.
\par 
\par The New Testament, though it does not recognise this principle of the Oriental Philosophy, \ldblquote  that evil originates from matter,\rdblquote  yet coincides with it in strenuously asserting that the corruption of the human mind is d
erived from its connexion with the human body.
\par 
\par To prove this proposition, I shall show that Paul calls all crimes the works of the flesh.\rdblquote  \ldblquote  Now, the works of the flesh are manifest, (says he, Gal. v. 19,) which are these: adultery, fornication, uncleanne
ss, lasciviousness, idolatry, sorcery, hatred, contentions, rivalries, wrath, disputes, divisions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like.\rdblquote 
 He also describes the conflict between the flesh and the spirit, or mind, in these terms:\emdash  \ldblquote For I know that in me, that is, in }{\i\f0 my flesh,}{\f0 
 dwelleth no good, for to will is present with me, but to perform that which is good, I find not, but the evil which I would not, that I do. For I delight in the law of God according to the }{\i\f0 inner man,}{\f0  but I 
see another law in my members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of my sin in my members. O wretched man that I am! who will deliver me from the body of this death ?\rdblquote 
 (or this body of death.) And he goes on to observe, \ldblquote  That I, the same man, with }{\i\f0 my mind}{\f0  serve the law of }{\i\f0 God,}{\f0  but with my }{\i\f0 flesh}{\f0  the law of sin.\rdblquote \emdash Rom. vii. \ldblquote 
For the flesh desireth against (or in opposition to) the spirit, and the spirit against \ldblquote the flesh, and }{\i\f0 these are contrary}{\f0  the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote Those that are Christ\rquote s (says Paul, Gal. v. 24) have }{\i\f0 crucified}{\f0  the flesh, with its passions and desires.\rdblquote  And they  are commanded (Rom. vi. 12 and viii. 13) \ldblquote to mortify,\rdblquote 
 or, according to the original, \ldblquote put to death or \ldblquote kill their members;\rdblquote  and Paul himself uses language upon this subject exceeding strong. He represents (1 Cor. ix. 27) his mind and body as engaged in combat, and says, 
\ldblquote  I }{\i\f0 buffet}{\f0  my body, and }{\i\f0 subject}{\f0  it.\rdblquote  The word here translated \ldblquote  subject,\rdblquote  in the original, means \ldblquote  to carry into servitude,\rdblquote 
 and is a term taken from the language of the olympic games where the boxers dragged off the arena, their conquered, disabled, and helpless antagonists like slaves, in which humbled condition the  Apostle r
epresents his body to be with respect to his mind.
\par 
\par From this notion of the sinfulness of \ldblquote  the flesh,\rdblquote  we are enabled to apprehend Paul\rquote s reasonings about the sufferings of Jesus \ldblquote  in the flesh.\rdblquote  \ldblquote 
 Since the children are partakers of flesh and blood, Christ himself also in like manner partook of them\rdblquote \emdash Heb. ii. 14. \ldblquote 
For (says Paul) what the law could not do in that it was weak  through the flesh, God hath done, who by having sent his own son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and on account of sin, hath condemned sin in the flesh.\rdblquote \emdash Rom. viii. 3. 
\ldblquote But now, through Christ Jesus, ye who formerly were far off, are brought near by the blood of Christ. For he is our Peace who hath made both one, and hath broken down the middle wall of partition between us, having abolished by }{\i\f0 
his flesh }{\f0 the cause of enmity.\rdblquote \emdash Ephes. ii. 16. \ldblquote You that were formerly aliens, and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet he hath now reconciled by }{\i\f0 his fleshly body,}{\f0  through his death.\rdblquote \emdash 
Col. i. 20.
\par 
\par Though these notions are sufficiently strange, yet they are not so very remarkable as the one I am about to consider. It is a singular, }{\i\f0  and }{\f0 
a demonstrable fact, that the fundamental scheme of Christianity was derived from the religion of the ancient Persians, The whole of the New Testament scheme 
is built upon the hypothesis, that there is a powerful and malignant being, called the Devil and Satan, the chief of unknown myriads of other evil spirits; that he is, by the sufferance of God, the Prince of this world, and is the Author of sin, woe and d
eath; the Tempter, the Tormentor of men, and the Tyrant of the Earth; that the Son of God, to deliver mankind from the vassalage of this monster, descended from heaven, and purchased their ransom of the Tyrant, at }{\i\f0 the price of his blood;}{\f0 
 for observe, my reader, that the idea of the death of Jesus being }{\i\f0 an atonement }{\f0 to }{\i\f0 God}{\f0  for the sins of men, is a }{\i\f0 modern}{\f0  notion; for the Primitive Christians, }{\i\f0 all of them,}{\f0 
 considered the death of Jesus as }{\i\f0 a ransom}{\f0  paid to }{\i\f0 the Devil, }{\f0 as may be proved from Origen and other Fathers. That the New Testament represents this character as }{\i\f0 the sovereign of this world,}{\f0 
 may be proved by the following passages:\emdash  \ldblquote All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them, (said }{\i\f0 the}{\f0  Tempter to Jesus, when he showed him all the kingdoms of the e
arth,) for it is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever }{\i\f0 I will,}{\f0  I give it.\rdblquote  Luke iv., Jesus calls him \ldblquote the Prince of this world;\rdblquote 
 John xii., and elsewhere. In his commission to Paul, he calls embracing his religion, \ldblquote  turning from darkness unto light, and from the power of }{\i\f0 Satan}{\f0  to God.\rdblquote \emdash 
. Acts xxvi. 18. Accordingly we find, that to become a }{\i\f0 Christian}{\f0  was considered as being freed from the tyranny of }{\i\f0 Satan. \ldblquote }{\f0 
 God hath given life to you, (says Paul) who were dead in offences, and sins; in which ye formerly walked, according to the course (or constitution) of this world, according to the }{\i\f0 Prince of the Power of the air.\rdblquote \emdash }{\f0 
Ephesians ii., 1. And again:\emdash   \ldblquote If our gospel be covered, (or hid) it is covered among those that are lost, among those unbelievers, whose minds the }{\i\f0 God of this world}{\f0 
 hath blinded, to the end that the glorious gospel of Christ should not enlighten them.\rdblquote \emdash  2 Cor. iv. 4. John says in his Epistle, that \ldblquote  the whole world lieth in the power of the wicked one;\rdblquote 
 and Jesus in the gospels compares }{\i\f0 him}{\f0  to \ldblquote  a strong man armed, keeping his goods;\rdblquote  and }{\i\f0 himself to}{\f0  one stronger than he, who strippeth him of the arms in which he trusted, and spoileth his goods. \ldblquote 
 For this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that }{\i\f0 he might destroy the works of the Devil.\rdblquote \emdash  }{\f0 1 John iii. 8. And it is said, \ldblquote  that he came to send forth the captive into liberty, and to }{\i\f0 heal}{\f0 
 those who were }{\i\f0 oppressed of the Devil.\rdblquote  }{\f0 Men are also said to have been \ldblquote  taken captive of the Devil, to fulfil his will.\rdblquote  \emdash 2 Timothy ii. 26. And we find that the C
hristians attributed all their sufferings to the opposition of this Being. \ldblquote 
 Put on (says Paul) the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. For we struggle not against flesh and blood only; but against principaliti
es, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against wicked spirits in high places.\rdblquote \emdash Ephesians vi. 12. Christians are also said to be delivered by God from the power of darkness, and to be }{\i\f0 translated}{\f0 
 into the kingdom of his dear so
n. That is, as Christians were considered as being the subjects of Jesus, and the rest of the world as being of the kingdom of Satan, when a man became a Christian he was translated from the kingdom of one, to the kingdom of the other. Jesus accused the D
evil as being the author of all evil, as a liar, and the father of lies, and a murderer of men, and of women, too, as appears in the Gospel, from the account of that one, whose back the Devil had bowed down for eighteen years\emdash Luke xiii. 10\emdash 
(on what account it does not appear.) In short, the New Testament represents to him as being the source of all evil and mischief, and the promoter of it; and the whole world as being }{\i\f0 his subjects,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 combined with him}{\f0 
 against all good.
\par 
\par But how does all this prove that th
ese notions were derived from the religion of the ancient Persians ? I answer by requesting you, my reader, to peruse, attentively, the following account of the fundamental principles of the religion of Zoroaster, the prophet of the Persians.
\par 
\par The doctrine
 of Zoroaster was, that there was one Supreme Being, independent, and self-existing from all eternity ; that inferior to him, there were two Angels, one the Angel of Light, who is the Author and Director of all Good; and the other, the Angel of Darkness, 
w
ho is the Author and Director of all Evil; that these two are in a perpetual struggle with each other; and that where the Angel of Light prevails, there the most is good; awl where the Angel of Darkness prevails, there the most is evil. That this struggle
 
shall continue to the end of the world; that then there shall be a general resurrection, and a day of judgment, wherein just retribution shall be rendered to all according to their works; after which, the Angel of Darkness, and his followers, shall go int
o
 a world of their own, where they shall suffer in darkness, the punishment of their evil deeds. And the Angel of Light, and his followers, shall also go into a world of their own, where they shall receive, in everlasting light, the reward due to their goo
d deeds.
\par 
\par It is impossible but that the reader must see the agreement of the doctrines of the New Testament with all this; and since it is undoubted, that these tenets of Zoroaster are far more ancient than the New Testament, and since, as we have seen, tha
t that book is much indebted to oriental notions for many of its dogmas, there is no way of accounting for this coincidence (that I know of), besides supposing the Devil of the New Testament to be of Persian origin. It is, however, in my power to make thi
s coincidence still more striking from the words of Jesus himself, who says, (Matthew xiii. 24), \ldblquote  The kingdom of Heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field, but while men slept, }{\i\f0 his enemy}{\f0  (mark the expression) }{\i\f0 
his}{\f0  enemy came, and sowed tares among the wheat; but when the blade sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder came near, and said unto him, \lquote 
 Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field ? whence, then, hath it tares ?\rquote  And he saith unto them, }{\i\f0 an enemy}{\f0  hath done this.\rdblquote  You know the rest of the parable. The explanation of it is as follows:\emdash  \ldblquote 
He who soweth the good seed is }{\i\f0 the Son of Man,}{\f0  and the field is }{\i\f0 the world;}{\f0  and the good seed are the sons of the kingdom, and the tares are the sons of the }{\i\f0 Evil One,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 the enemy}{\f0  who sowed them is }
{\i\f0 the Devil.\rdblquote }{\f0  Here you see, as far as it goes, a precise agreement with the doctrine of Zoroaster; and to complete the resemblance, you need but to recollect, that at the day of Judgment, according to th
e words of Jesus, the wicked go into the fire prepared for the Devil and his angels; and the righteous go into life eternal with the Son of God.
\par 
\par But is there not a Satan mentioned in the Old Testament, and is he not there represented as an evil and malevo
lent angel? I think not. This notion probably arises from the habit of interpreting the Old Testament by the New. The Satan mentioned in the Old Testament, is represented as God\rquote 
s minister of punishment, and as much his faithful servant as any of his angels. The prologue to the book of Job certainly supposes that this angel of punishment, by office, appeared in the court of Heaven, nay, he is ranked among \ldblquote 
 the Sons of God.\rdblquote  This Satan is merely the supposed chief of those ministers of God\rquote s will, whose off
ice is to execute his ordered commands upon the guilty, and who may be sometimes, as in the case of Job, the minister of probation only, rather than of punishment; and there is no reason why he should be ashamed of his office more than the General of an a
rmy, or the Judges of the criminal courts, who, though they are not unfrequently ministers of punishment are not, therefore, excluded the royal presence; but on the contrary, their office is considered as honourable; \emdash 
i. e., punishment without malevolence, 
does not pollute the inflictor. Consider the story of the destruction of Sodom, Genesis xix.; of Egypt; Exodus xxii.; of Sennacherib, 1 Kings xxix. 35; also Joshua v. 13. The term Satan signifies an adversary, and is applied to any angel sent upon an erra
nd of punishment For example, Numbers xxii. 23, \ldblquote The Angel of the Lord stood in the way, for an adversary (literally, for a }{\i\f0 Satan)}{\f0  against Balaam, with his sword drawn in his hand.\rdblquote  \ldblquote 
 Curse ye Meroz, saith the Angel of the Lord,\rdblquote  whose office is to punish. So also Psalms xxxv. 5, \ldblquote  Let the Angel (of punishment) of the Lord }{\i\f0 chase}{\f0 
 them, (i. e., drive them before him in a military manner; pursue them:) let their way be dark and slippery, and the Angel of the Lord following them.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par 2 Samuel xxiv. 16:\emdash   \ldblquote The Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel\emdash the angel (of punishment) stretched forth his hand and smote the people.\rdblquote \emdash  1 Chronicles xxi. 16 }{\i\f0 :\emdash }{\f0  \ldblquote 
David saw the angel (of punishment) having a drawn sword in his hand.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par This notion is referred to, in the Apocryphal History of Susannah, verse 69. \ldblquote  The Angel of the Lord waiteth with his sword that he may cut thee in two.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Thus we see, that the term }{\i\f0 Satan}{\f0  is in the Old Testament applied to }{\i\f0 any Angel of the Lord}{\f0  sent upon an errand of punishment. And the term itself is so far from being }{\i\f0 reproachful}{\f0 
 (for David is said, 1 Samuel xxix. 4, to have been \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 a Satan}{\f0  to the Philistines,\rdblquote ) that I am not sure, that if I had by me a Hebrew concordance, but I could point out places, where }{\i\f0 God himself }{\f0 
is represented as saying, that he would be an adversary or a Satan to bad men and wicked nations. And though there is in the Old Testament a particular angel styled, by way of eminence, \ldblquote  The }{\i\f0 Satan,\rdblquote }{\f0  it is so far }{\i\f0 
from}{\f0  being evident that he is an evil being, that I would undertake to give good reasons to prove that this distinguished angel is the real prototype, from whence the impostor Mahomet took the idea of his  \ldblquote Azrael,\rdblquote  the 
\ldblquote  Angel of Death;\rdblquote  who, in the Koran, is certainly represented as being as much the faithful servant of God, as any of the Angelic Hosts.
\par 
\par In fine, the doctrine of the Old Testament upon this matter may be thus expressed:\emdash   \ldblquote These be spirits created for vengeance, which in their fury lay on sore strokes; in }{\i\f0 the time of destruction,}{\f0  they pour out their force, }{
\i\f0 sad appease the wrath of him that made them.}{\f0  They shall rejoice in his (God\rquote s) commandment, and they shall be ready upon earth, when }{\i\f0 need is: a}{\f0 nd when their time is come, they }{\i\f0 shall not transgress his word.
\rdblquote   }{\f0 Ecclesiasticus xxxix. }{\i\f0 28.
\par 
\par }{\f0 CHAPTER XIV.
\par 
\par A CONSIDERATION OF THE \ldblquote GIFT OF TONGUES,\rdblquote  AND OTHER MIRACULOUS GIFTS ASCRIBED O THE PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANS; AND WHETHER RECORDED MIRACLES ARE INFALLIBLE PROOFS }{\i\f0 OF}{\f0 
 THE DIVINE AUTHORITY OF DOCTRINES SAID TO HAVE BEEN CONFIRMED BY THEM.
\par 
\par Paul, in his 1st Epistle to the Corinthian
s, speaks to them as possessing several spiritual gifts, conferred on them by his ministration; such as the gift of prophecy, discerning of spirits, and speaking in unknown tongues. He gives them directions about the proper use of their gifts, and speaks 
t
o them as absolutely possessing those gifts, with the utmost confidence. Dr. Paley, in his Defence of Christianity, lays great stress upon the manner in which Paul addresses the Corinthians upon these miraculous powers; and he considers it as an absolute 
proof of the truth of Christianity\emdash because, he says, it }{\i\f0 is }{\f0  not conceivable that Paul could have had the boldness and presumption to speak to these men concerning  the use and abuse of these }{\i\f0 gifts,}{\f0 
 if they really had them not.
\par 
\par I am ready to confess, that t
his argument of Dr. Paley puzzled me; for though I was satisfied that Paul had imposed upon their credulity many irrelevant passages from the Scriptures as proofs of Christianity, yet I could not imagine that he could presume so much upon their stupidity,
 
as to give them directions about the management of their miraculous powers, which being matters of fact known to themselves, therefore, if false, I conceived must place Paul in their minds in the light of a banterer, when he told them of gifts, which thei
r own consciousness, I thought, must make them sensible they had not. I say I was puzzled with this argument, until I happened to meet with some extracts from Brown\rquote s \ldblquote History of the Shakers,\rdblquote 
 which convinced me at once, from the obvious likeness between these Shakers and the primitive Christians, that Paul might have written to the Corinthians \ldblquote  concerning their spiritual gifts,\rdblquote  with perfect impunity.
\par 
\par This Brown had been a Shaker himself, and while with them, he was as great a believer in his own and thei
r gifts, as the Corinthians could be ; and since it must be obvious, that the gifts of these Shakers are mere self-delusions, there is, then, in our own times an example of the gifts of the primitive Christians, which enables us to comprehend their nature
 and character }{\i\f0 perfectly well.
\par 
\par }{\f0 \ldblquote Many of them,\rdblquote  (the Shakers) says Mr. Brown, \ldblquote professed to have visions, and to }{\i\f0 see numbers of spirits,}{\f0  as plain as they saw their brethren and. sisters, and to }{\i\f0 look into the invisible world,}{
\f0  and to }{\i\f0 converse with many of the departed spirits,}{\f0 
 who had lived in the different ages of the world, and to learn and to see their different states in the world of spirits. Some they saw, they said, were happy, and others miserable. Several declared, that they often were in dark nights s
urrounded with a light, sometimes in their rooms, but more often when walking the road, so strong, that they could see to pick up a pin, which light would continue a considerable time, and enlighten them on their way. Many }{\i\f0 
had gifts to speak languages,}{\f0  and many miracles were said to be wrought, and strange signs and great wonders shown, by the believers.
\par 
\par And these poor creatures believed, and at this day }{\i\f0 do believe,}{\f0  all this. They are not, you will observe, }{\i\f0 artful impostors,}{\f0  for the Shakers are, certainly,
 a harmless and a moral people, and yet they confidently asserted (and continue to assert), that they had these miraculous powers of \ldblquote  discerning spirits, speaking with tongues, and doing great signs and wonders\rdblquote 
 Nevertheless, it must be evident, that these powers were conferred upon them only by their enthusiasm and heated imaginations.
\par 
\par I have heard of the Shakers before, and have been informed, that those in New England are so convinced of their miraculous capabilities, that they have been known, in orde
r to save their neighbours the trouble of applying to the tinman, charitably to offer to join the gaping seams of their worn-out tin coffee-pots, and other vessels, \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 without the carnal aid of solder,\rdblquote }{\f0 
 merely by a touch of their wonder-working fingers.
\par 
\par Mr. Brown, in describing their mode of conduct, in their religious assemblies, unwittingly gives a striking exposition of the 1st Epistle to the Corinthians.  He describes \ldblquote the brethren and sisters\rdblquote 
 praying, singing, dancing, and preaching in known and unknown tongues, and sticking out their arms, and extatically following their noses round the church.
\par 
\par He says, respecting such as speak in unknown tongues, \ldblquote  they have a strong faith in this gift, and think a person greatly favoured who has the gift of tongues
 ; and at certain times, when the mind is overloaded with a fiery, strong zeal, it must have vent some way or other; their faith, or belief, at the time being in this, gift, and a will strikes the mind according to their faith, and then such break out in 
a fiery, energetic manner, and }{\i\f0 speak they know not what,}{\f0  as }{\i\f0 I have done}{\f0  several times. Part of what I spake at one time was
\par 
\par 
\par }{\i\f0 \ldblquote Liero devo jerankemango, ad sileambano, durem subramo, deviranto diacerimango, jasse vah pe cri evanigalio}{\f0 ; }{\i\f0 de vom grom seb crinom, os vare cremo domo.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 \ldblquote  When a person runs on in this manner for any length of time, I now thought it probable that he would strike into different languages, and give some words in each their right pronounciation, as I have heard some men of learning, wh
o were present, say a few words, were Hebrew, three or four Greek, and a few Latin.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par In another place he gives an account of his maiden speech in an unknown tongue; and it is easy to conjecture how he came by his gift, by attending to what passed before he broke out. Here it is:\emdash   \ldblquote We danced for }{\i\f0 near an hour,}{
\f0  several }{\i\f0 turned round like tops,}{\f0  and, to crown all, I had a gift to speak in some other language; but the greatest misfortune was, that }{\i\f0 neither I, nor any other, understood what I said.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 My reader will not be surprized after this, at hearing them say, that the spectators of \ldblquote  these signs and wonders,\rdblquote  instead of being properly affected, considered the performers as \ldblquote out of their wits.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Let us, now, compare this account with what Paul says upon similar subjects, in the 14th chapter of the 1st Epistle to the Corinthians. He advises them, in exercising their gifts, to a discreet use of them, as follows:\emdash  \ldblquote 
He who speaketh in an unknown tongue, speaketh not to men, but to God, for no }{\i\f0 man understandeth him}{\f0 ; howbeit in the spirit he speaketh mysteries.\rdblquote  Again:  \ldblquote 
For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to battle ? So, likewise, unless ye utter by the tongue }{\i\f0 words to}{\f0  be }{\i\f0 understood,}{\f0  how shall it be known what is spoken, for ye will speak to the air ?
\rdblquote   And as others did not understand the Corinthians speaking in unknown tongues, so it seems, too, that the Corinthians themselves were in the same unfortunate predicament with the Shakers, in not knowing }{\i\f0 the meaning }{\f0 of what they }
{\i\f0 themselves}{\f0  said on these occasions. This is clear from this argument of Paul:\emdash   \ldblquote Wherefore, let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue, }{\i\f0 pray that he may interpret.\rdblquote }{\f0 
 Why, pray that he may interpret, if he understood himself? Does a man who speaks with understanding 
a foreign language, need to pray that he may be enabled to interpret what he says in his mother tongue?  Surely every man who understands himself, can naturally do this? After more to the same purpose, Paul wisely concludes his argument by declaring,  
\ldblquote that he would rather speak in the church five words with understanding, (i. e., knowing what he said) that he might instruct others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.\rdblquote 
 And he fortifies his reasoning by this sensible remark, \ldblquote If, therefore, the whole church come together into one place, and all speak in unknown tongues, and those that are unlearned, or unbelievers, come in, will they not say, that ye are mad ?
\rdblquote  as the spectators said of the Shakers.
\par 
\par He advises them, therefore, to conduct their assemblies with less uproar than formerly, and exhorts them as follows:\emdash   \ldblquote 
How is it, then, brethren, when you come together, hath each of you a psalm, hath he a doctrine, hath he an unknown tongue, hath he a revelation ? Let all things be done to edifyin
g. Now, if any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two, or at most by three, and that in succession, and let one interpret; but if there be no interpreter, let such keep silence in the church, and let him speak to himself and to God. And let two 
or three prophets speak, and let the others discern. But if any thing be revealed to another who sitteth by, let the first keep silence. For ye may all prophecy, one by one, that all may learn, and all may be exhorted.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par I presume it will be needless to point out more particularly, the perfect correspondence between \ldblquote  the spiritual gifts\rdblquote 
 of the Corinthians, and those of the Shakers.  And I would ask the venerable Paley, if it were now possible, whether an apostolical epistle of Ann Lee, William Lee,  or Whi
taker, (the spiritual mother and. fathers of the Shakers,) addressed to them, and seriously giving directions about the use of \ldblquote  their gifts of working miracles, and speaking with tongues,\rdblquote 
 would be sufficient to prove that they really had those gifts ? An
d, moreover, (to make the cases more analogous) suppose that the Shakers from this time become the dominant sect throughout the religious world, and kept the upper hand during a series of a thousand or two thousand years, taking especial care to collect a
n
d burn up every writing of their enemies and opposers. How should we, (supposing ourselves all the while invisible spectators of the thing), how should we pity our posterity, who, at the end of that period, should be gravely told by the learned and mitred
 advocates of Shakerism, that the miracles of the founders, and first followers of their religion were certainly true, }{\i\f0 for}{\f0 
 that they were honest and good men, with no motive to deceive, and had addressed letters to their first converts, wherein they make ex
press mention of their possessing these gifts; and give in the simplest and most unassuming manner, directions for using them. Suppose, then, that our posterity, having been deprived by the prudential care of the old fathers of the then established church
, of the means of detecting the fallacy which we possess; suppose that }{\i\f0 they}{\f0  should }{\i\f0 believe}{\f0  all this, and devoutly praise God every day for confirming the doctrines of his servants Lee and Whitaker, \ldblquote 
 with signs following\rdblquote \emdash  how should we pity their delusion, and. what should we think of the unlucky authors of it.
\par 
\par From all this, I think my reader must be sensible how extremely fallacious are all proofs of doctrines, pretended to be from God, derived from Miracles }{\i\f0 said to have been}{\f0  wrought in proof of their Divine authority.
\par 
\par Miracles are related to have been performed in support of all religions without exception ; even the followers of Mahomet, though he did not claim the power of working miracles, have said that he did. And they will tell you, that in proof 
of his mission, he, in the presence of hundreds, divided the moon with his finger, and put half of it in his pocket!}{\cs16\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20 
I will here lay before the reader the arguments advanced by the Mahometans in behalf of the miracles of their prophet, extracted from the learned Reland\rquote s}{\i\f0\fs20  }{\f0\fs20 account of Mehometanism. They say that\emdash  \ldblquote 
the miracles of Mahomet and his followers have been recorded in innumerable volumes of the most famous, learned, pious, and subtle Doctors of the Mahometan Faith, who let nothing pass without the s
trictest and severest examination, and whose tradition, therefore, is unexceptionable among them; that they were known throughout all the regions of Arabia, and transmitted by common and universal tradition from father to son, from generation to generatio
n. That the books of Interpreters and Commentators on the Koran, the books of Historians, especially such as give an account of Mahomet\rquote s life and actions, the books of annalists and lawyers, the books of mathematicians and philosophers, }{
\i\f0\fs20 and,}{\f0\fs20  last of all, t
he books of both Jews and Christians concerning Mahomet, are full of his miracles. That if the authority of so many great and wise doctors be denied, then, for their part, they cannot see but that a universal scepticism as to all other accounts of miracle
s
 must obtain among people of all persuasions. For authority being the only proof of facts done out of our time, or out of our sight, if that be denied, there is no way to come to the certainty of any such, without immediate inspiration; and all accounts o
f matters recorded in history, must be doubtful and precarious.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote And these witnesses would not have dared to assert these miracles unless they were true; for such as forged any miracles for his, which he really did not, lay under a hearty curse from the p
rophet. For it was a received tradition among the faithful, that Mahomet denounced hell and damnation to all those who should tell any lies of him. So that none who believed in Mahomet, durst attribute miracles to him }{\i\f0\fs20 which }{\f0\fs20 
he was not concerned in; and those who believed not in him, would certainly never have given him the honour of working any, unless he had done so.\rdblquote 
 Christian reader, thou seest how much can be said, and how many respectable witnesses and authorities can be adduced to prove that Mahomet w
rought miracles. Canst thou adduce more, or better, authorities in behalf of the miracles of the New Testament ? Art thou not rather satisfied how fallacious the evidence of testimony is in all such cases ?
\par 
\par This is not all that the Mahometan might urge in
 behalf of his prophet, for he might tell the Christian, boasting that Jesus and his Apostles converted the Roman world from idolatry, that they overthrew one system of idolatry, only to build up another, since the worship of Jesus, the Virgin Mary, and t
he Saints, and their images was established in a few hundred years after Jesus, and continues to this day ;
\par an idolatry as rank, and much more inexcusable than the worship of the ancient Greeks and Romans. Whereas, Mahomet cut \ldblquote up root and branch, both Chri
stian and Pagan idolatry, and proclaimed one only God as the object of adoration; and if the Christian should urge the rapid propagation of Christianity, the Mahometan might reply, that Mahomet was a poor camel-driver, but that Islamism made more progress
 
in one hundred years, than Christianity did in a thousand; that it was embraced by the noble, the great, the wise, and the learned, almost as soon as it appeared; whereas, Christianity was skulking and creeping among the mob of the Roman Empire for some h
u
ndred years before it dared to raise its head in public view. If the Christian should reply to this, by ascribing the success of Mahometanism to the sword, the Mahometan might reply, with truth, that it was a vulgar error; for that vastly more nations emb
raced Islamism }{\i\f0\fs20 voluntarily,}{\f0\fs20  than there were who }{\i\f0\fs20 freely }{\f0\fs20 
received Christianity; and he might remind him, how much Christianity owed to the accession of Constantine; to Charlemagne; and the Teutonic Knights; and bid him recollect that the monks were assisted b
y soldiers to convert to Christianity almost every nation in Modern Europe.\emdash E.
\par }}}{\f0 
\par 
\par Speaking of the gift of healing diseases, which the Primitive Christians claimed. Dr. Middleton, in his Free Inquiry, observes\emdash  \ldblquote But be that as it will the pretence of curing
 diseases, by a miraculous power, was so suc- cessfully maintained in the heathen world by fraud, and craft, that when it came to be challenged by the Christians, it was not capable of exciting any attention to it among those who themselves pretended to t
h
e same power; which, although the certain effect of imposture, was yet managed with so much art, that the Christians could neither deny nor detect it; but insisted always that it was performed by demons, or evil spirits, deluding mankind to their ruin; an
d from the supposed reality of the fact, they inferred the reasonableness of believing what was more credibly affirmed by the Christians, to be performed by the power of the true God. \ldblquote  We do }{\i\f0 not deny }{\f0 says Athenagoras, \ldblquote 
that, in different places, cities, and countries, there are some extraordinary works performed }{\i\f0 in the name of idols,}{\f0  from which some have received benefit, others harm.\rdblquote 
 And then he goes on to prove that they were not performed by God, but by demons. Doctor Middleton then proceeds, (p. 77.) \ldblquote 
 whatever proof, then, the primitive Church had among themselves, yet it could have but little effect towards making proselytes among those who pretended to the }{\i\f0 same gift;}{\f0 
 possessed more largely, and exerted more openly, than in the private assemblies of t
he Christians. For in the Temple of Esculapius, all kinds of diseases were believed to be publicly cured by the pretended help of that deity: in proof of which, there were erected in each temple columns, or tables of brass, and marble, on which a distinct
 narrative of each particular cure was inscribed.\rdblquote  He also observes that\emdash   \ldblquote Pausanias writes, \lquote 
 that in the temple at Epidauras there were many columns anciently of this kind, and six of them remaining in his time inscribed with the names of men and women cured by the god, with \ldblquote 
an account of their several cases, and the method of their cure; and that there was an old pillar besides, which stood apart, dedicated to the memory of Hippolytus, who }{\i\f0 had been raised from the dead!\rquote }{\f0  Strabo, also, another grave writ
er, informs us, that these temples were constantly filled with the sick, imploring the help of the god: and that they had tables hanging around them, in which all the miraculous cures were described.\rdblquote  Dr. Middleton then proceeds thus\emdash  
\ldblquote There is a remarkable fragment of one of these tables still extant, and exhibited by Gruter, in his collection, as it was found in the ruins of Esculapius\rquote  Temple, in the island of the Tyber, at Rome, which gives an account of }{\i\f0 
two blind men restored to sight,}{\f0  by Esculapius, in the }{\i\f0 open}{\f0  view, and with }{\i\f0 loud declamations of the people, acknowledging the manifest power of the god!!\rdblquote }{\f0  Upon which he remarks, that  \ldblquote 
the learned Montfaucon makes this reflection, \lquote  that in this, are seen either the wiles of the Devil, or the tricks of Pagan priests, suborning men to counterfeit diseases, and miraculous cures.\rquote \rdblquote  He then proceeds, (p.79)\emdash  
\ldblquote Now, though nothing can support the belief, or credit of miracles more authentically than public monuments erected in proof, and }{\i\f0 memory}{\f0  of them }{\i\f0 at the time}{\f0  they }{\i\f0 were performed,}{\f0 
 yet, in defiance of that authority, it is certain all these Heathen miracles were pure forgeries, contrived to delude the multitude; and, in truth, this particular claim of curing diseases miraculously, affords gre
at room for such a delusion, and a wide field for the exercise of craft.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par I need not observe, that by far the greater part of the miracles recorded in the New Testament, are casting out devils, and healing diseases, powers claimed by the heathens as well as these Christians:  and these miracles, (undoubtedly false) are }{\i\f0 
as well,}{\f0  if not }{\i\f0 far better}{\f0  authenticated than those of the New Testament: for books may be }{\i\f0 forged,}{\f0  but }{\i\f0 public}{\f0  monuments of }{\i\f0 brass}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 marble}{\f0  are not so capable of being so
 : and these are always con- sidered as better evidence for facts than }{\i\f0 books.}{\f0  What then will the Christian say to this ? for since these miracles, recorded on brass and marble, inscribed with the narratives of them }{\i\f0 
almost immediately after the occurrence of them, }{\f0 are unquestionably }{\i\f0 Lies ;}{\f0  what can he pretend to say of those recorded in books certainly written many years }{\i\f0 after}{\f0 
 the events they record, and, as will be proved hereafter, }{\i\f0 more than suspected to}{\f0  be }{\i\f0 apocryphal ?}{\f0  And what would become of truth ? and
 who would be able to distinguish truth from falsehood, in matters of religion, if attested miracles, such as these, are sufficient to establish the divine authority of doctrines said to be confirmed by them ? Miracles are as numerous, and better authenti
c
ated on the part of Jupiter, Apollo, and Esculapius, than on the part of Christianity. They are strong on the part of Popery against Protestantism: for the Roman Catholic Churches in Europe are full of monumental records of miracles wrought by the Virgin 
M
ary and the Saints, in favour of their worshippers. Nay, there never were miracles better proved, as far as human testimony could prove them, than the famous miracle mentioned by Gibbon in his History of the Roman Empire, where he relates the story of the
 Arian Vandals cutting out the tongues of a great number of orthodox Athanasians, who, strange to tell, preached }{\i\f0 as much to the purpose,}{\f0 
 in favour of the Trinity, without their tongues, as they did with them! Never was there a miracle better authenticated by }{\i\f0 testimony}{\f0 
 than this. It is mentioned by all the Christian writers of that age. It is mentioned by two contemporary Roman historians, one of whom lived in Constantinople, and who says he looked into the mouths of some of these confessors, who had in fact 
their tongues cut out entirely by the roots ; and it is recorded in the archives of the Eastern Empire.
\par 
\par Is not this testimony enough; and yet, is it sufficient to prove the doctrine of the Trinity? Is it adequate to prove, that \ldblquote the ancient of days\rdblquote  became a little child ; was born of a woman, suckled, *******, &c., &c. ; and that 
\ldblquote  He who liveth for ever and ever,\rdblquote  was whipped, was hanged, and }{\i\f0 died }{\f0 upon the cross, and was buried ? Can this miracle, well attested as it is, prove for truths, such strange, such shocking things as these ?
\par 
\par The miracles of the Abbe Paris, too, are proved to be true, as far as }{\i\f0 testimony}{\f0  can prove any thing of the kind. For they happened within }{\i\f0 a }{\f0 hundred years, were seen by many, and were }{\i\f0 sworn to}{\f0 
 before the magistrates; by some of the most respectable inhabitants of the city of Paris. How  can men, who pretend to believe the miracles of the New Testament upon such meagre evidence as they have in their favour, }{\i\f0 consistently}{\f0 
 reject the miracles of the Abbe Paris ? attested by evidence recent, respectable, and so strong, that to this }{\i\f0 day,}{\f0 
 the juggle, and the means by which so many respectable people were imposed upon, have never yet been thoroughly developed, and explained.
\par 
\par CHAPTER XV.
\par 
\par APPLICATION OF THE TWO TESTS, SAID, IN DEUTERONOMY, TO HAVE BEEN GIVEN BY GOD, AS DISCRIMINATING A TRUE PROPHET FROM A FALSE ONE, TO THE CHARACTER AND ACTIONS OF JESUS.
\par 
\par In the 18th chapter of Deuteronomy God says,\emdash  \ldblquote The Prophet which shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not commanded
 him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of other gods, even that Prophet shall die. And if thou say in thine heart, how shall we know (or distinguish,) the word which the Lord hath not spoken?\rdblquote  Here is the criterion. \ldblquote 
 When a Prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing }{\i\f0 follow not,}{\f0  nor }{\i\f0 come to pass;}{\f0  that is the thing which the Lord hath }{\i\f0 not spoken.}{\f0 
 That Prophet hath spoken presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Again, Deuteronomy 13, \ldblquote If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and give you }{\i\f0 a sign or a wonder}{\f0  (i. e. a miracle,) and the sign or wonder }{\i\f0 come to pass,}{\f0 
 whereof he spake unto thee saying, let us go after other gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them: thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams ; for the Lord your God }{\i\f0 proveth}{\f0  (or tryeth) }{
\i\f0 you,}{\f0  to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all you heart, and with all your soul.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par And now Christian reader, I ask you what you think of miracles, or \ldblquote  signs and wonders,\rdblquote 
 as proof of a divine mission, to teach doctrines novel and innovating, after such clear and unequivocal language as this, from such high authority? I am sure, that if you are a sincere lover of truth, you must certainly abandon that ground as u
ntenable. For, from these direc- tions, the Jews were commanded these things}{\cs16\f0\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super #}{ }{\f0\fs20 Compare the above with Maimonides, Hilchot Yessode Hattorah, from chapter 7.
\emdash D.
\par }}}{\f0 . 1. That the Prophet who presumes to speak a word, as from God, which God hath not commanded hi
m to speak, must be put to death. 2. That the test, or criterion by which they are to discern a false prophet from a true one, is this : not his miracles, but the }{\i\f0 fulfillment of his words.}{\f0 
 If what he says comes to pass, he is a true prophet; if the event foretold does not take place, he has spoken presump- tuously, and must die the death. 3. \ldblquote  If any man arise in Israel,\rdblquote 
 and advise, or teach them to worship any other besides the Eternal; and in proof of the divinity of his mission promise a sign, or a wond
er, and in fact does bring to pass the sign or wonder promised, he is nevertheless, not to be hearkened to; but to be put to death.  And these criteria given by God, or Moses, as the means whereby they might know a true Prophet from a false one, most exqu
isitely prove his wisdom and foresight. For if he had not expressly excluded miracles, or \ldblquote  signs and wonders,\rdblquote 
 from being proof of the divinity of doctrines, the barriers which divided his religion from those of idolaters, must have been broken down; since, as we have seen, well attested miracles (meaning always by miracles, \ldblquote  signs and wonders,
\rdblquote  brought to pass by human agency,) are related to have been performed in proof of the divinity of every religion under Heaven. But veritable prophecy is, and can he
 a proof proper only to a true Revelation, because none can know what is to come but God, and those sent by him. Accordingly, we find that the Jewish Prophets were not acknowledged as such, but on account of }{\i\f0 their foretelling the truth,}{\f0  or }
{\i\f0 being supposed to do so.}{\f0 
\par 
\par Thus, it is said, 1 Samuel iii. 20, \ldblquote  And all Israel, from Dan even to Beersheba, knew, that Samuel was established to be a Prophet of the Lord.\rdblquote 
 Why ? Because he performed miracles ? No ! he performed none. But he was known as a Prophet because \ldblquote  the Lord was with him, and let none of his words fall to the ground,\rdblquote 
 i. e. fail of their accomplishment. The same, may be said of all the Hebrew Prophets, from Nathan to Malachi. For though Elijah and Elisha performed miracles, yet it was not in proof o
f their mission, for that was established before; but these miracles were occasional acts of beneficence, or protection, but were never considered, or offered by them as proofs of their being sent from God.
\par 
\par These things being by this time, it is hoped, ma
de plain and evident, let us now test the character of Jesus as a true Prophet, by the criteria, by Christians, and by the Jews, believed to be given by God. If his prophecies were fulfilled, and if he taught the worship of no other being besides the Eter
nal, he was, according to the Old Testament, a true Prophet. But if any of his prophecies were not fulfilled, or, if he taught the worship of any other Being besides the Eternal, he was not a true Prophet.
\par 
\par And here it must be recollected, that those prophecies of Jesus only, can be brought forward in this question, which were committed to writing, before the event foretold came to pass ; and therefore all Jesus\rquote 
 prophecies concerning the manner and circumstances of his death, &c., must be set aside, as all 
those events are allowed to have taken place before any of the Gospels were written; and of course it is not certain that Jesus did actually foretell them. This is acknowledged by Christians; and accordingly they confine themselves to bringing forward as 
conclusive evidence in their favour, his Prophecy of the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the events following. Here it is. Luke xxi. 21. \ldblquote 
When ye shall see Jerusalem com- passed with armies, then know, that the desolation thereof is nigh. Then let them which 
are in Judea flee to the mountains, and let them which are in the midst of it, depart out, and let not them which are in the counter, enter thereinto. For these be the days of vengeance, that all things }{\i\f0 which are written}{\f0 
 may be fulfilled. But woe unto them
 that are with child, and to them which give suck in those days. For there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations, and Jerusalem shall b
e trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars, and upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity, the sea and waves roaring, man\rquote 
s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth: for the powers of the heavens shall be shaken. And }{\i\f0 then,}{\f0 
 shall they see the Son of Man coming in a cloud, with power, and great glory. And when these things begin to come to pass, then }{\i\f0 look up, }{\f0 and }{\i\f0 lift up your heads ;}{\f0  for }{\i\f0 your redemption draweth nigh.}{\f0 
 And he spake to them a parable, Behold the fig tree and all the trees. When they now shoot forth, ye see, and know of your own selves, that summer is now nigh at hand. So likewise y
e, when ye see these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand. Verily I say unto you, }{\i\f0 this generation }{\f0 shall }{\i\f0 not pass away}{\f0  till }{\i\f0 all be fulfilled.}{\f0 
 Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Such is the prophecy, and on it I would remark, first, that what Jesus here foretells concerning Jerusalem did in fact come to pass. But that was not a fulfillment of }{\i\f0 his}{\f0  prophecy, but of }{\i\f0 Daniel\rquote s,}{\f0 
 who did, as is set down in. the 7th chapter of this work, expressly foretell the utter destruction of the city and the temple. And it was from }{\i\f0 Daniel}{\f0  that Jesus obtained his know- ledge of the approach of that event. For he }{\i\f0 
expressly cites Daniel,}{\f0  Matthew xxiv. 15 ; Mark xiii. 14; and you will please to observe reader, that he }{\i\f0 refers to}{\f0  him in this quotation from Luke, in the words, \ldblquote  these be the days of vengeance }{\i\f0 
that all things which are written,}{\f0  may be fulfilled. So that in foretelling the destruction of Jerusalem he did no more than any Jew of that age, who attentively read their Scriptures, could have done, and. been no prophet either.
\par 
\par 2. It would have been better for his reputation as a Prophet, if he had stopped short where Daniel stopped. For what he goes on to foretell has }{\i\f0 not been}{\f0  fulfilled. For he proceeds to say, that \ldblquote 
 there shall be signs in the sun, and the moon, and the stars,\rdblquote  &c. All this is taken from the 2nd chapter of Joel, who says that such things shall take place; not, however, at the }{\i\f0 destruction}{\f0  of }{\i\f0 Jerusalem,}{\f0  but in 
\ldblquote the latter days,\rdblquote  at the time of the }{\i\f0 restoration}{\f0 
 of Israel. So that here Jesus has been rather unlucky. For, in truth, there were no signs in the sun, and the moon, and the stars, at that time; neither was there upon earth any \ldblquote  great distress of nations,\rdblquote  except in Judea. Nor were 
\ldblquote  the powers of heaven\rdblquote  shaken. Certainly, they did not see Jesus \ldblquote  coming in the clouds of heaven, with power, and great glory;\rdblquote  and most assuredly, that generation did pass away, and many others since, and 
\ldblquote  all these things\rdblquote  have not been fulfilled.
\par 
\par I know very well, and have very often smiled over the contrivances by which learned Christians have endeavoured to save the credit of this prophecy. They say that\emdash 
it is a figurative prophecy relating entirely to the destruction of Jerusalem, which did in fact take place in that generation ; that the expressions about the \ldblquote distress of nations,\rdblquote  and \ldblquote the sea and waves roaring,\rdblquote 
 the \ldblquote  signs in heaven,\rdblquote  &c., are merely poetical; and that the shaking of the powers of heaven was merely the shaking and pulling- down the stones of the temple, figuratively called heaven; and that the glorious coming of Jesus 
\ldblquote  in the clouds of heaven, with power, and great glory,\rdblquote  meant merely, that he sent Titus, and the Romans to destroy, Jerusalem, or perhaps might have been an invisible spectator himself.
\par 
\par The reader will easily see, that all this is }{\i\f0 nonsense.}{\f0  And the Commentator Grotius, after meddling a great while in this troublesome business, at length ventures to }{\i\f0 insinuate,}{\f0  that God might have suffered Jesus to be in }{
\i\f0 a mistake}{\f0  about the time of his second coming, and to tell the Apostles what he did, for the sake of keeping up their spirits!
\par 
\par But to annihilate the figurative hypothesis of these well-meaning Commentators at once, it will be only necessary to bring forward the testimony following.  1. The other Evangelists make an }{\i\f0 express distinction}{\f0 
 between the destruction of Jerusalem and the coming of Jesus; and not only so, but represent him as saying, that }{\i\f0 after}{\f0  that event, (i. e., the destruction of Jerusalem, \ldblquote  in those days,\rdblquote 
 i. e., in the same era in which that event took place,) \ldblquote  the son of man shall come,\rdblquote  &c. Witness for me, Mark, chapter xiii. 24:\emdash  \ldblquote But }{\i\f0 in those days,}{\f0  after }{\i\f0 that tribulation,}{\f0 
 (i. e., the destruction of Jerusalem) shall the sun be darkened, and
 the moon shall not give her light, and the stars of heaven shall fall, and the powers that are in heaven shall be shaken. And then shall they see the son of man coming in the clouds, with power and glory; and- then shall he send his angels, and shall gat
her his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth, to the uttermost part of heaven Verily, I say unto you, that this generation shall not pass, till all these things be accomplished.\rdblquote  This is decisive, and cannot be evaded.

\par 
\par 2. The Apostles and Primitive Christians believed that Jesus would come in }{\i\f0 that generation, as}{\f0  is evident from many passages of the New Testament. Paul\rquote 
s Epistles to the Thessalonians prove this, and contain an argument to them, intended to allay their terrors, or their impatience. John says in his first Epistle, chapter ii. 18, \ldblquote Little children, it is }{\i\f0 the last hour;}{\f0 
 and as ye have heard that Antichrist should }{\i\f0 come,}{\f0  even now}{\i\f0  (or }{\f0 already) there are many Antichrists, whereby }{\i\f0 know}{\f0  that it is the }{\i\f0 last}{\f0  hour.\rdblquote  Many passage
s of similar import might be brought forward. The meaning of it is this\emdash  It appears from Paul\rquote s 2nd Epistle to the Thessalonians, that just before the second coming of Jesus, there was a personage to appear who was to be called }{\i\f0 
Antichrist, i. e.,}{\f0  an enemy to the Messiah. (This notion they got from the interpretation given by the angel of the vision of the \ldblquote little horn\rdblquote  in Daniel.) John, therefore, seeing many }{\i\f0 Antichrists, i. e., }{\f0 
opposers of the pretensions of Jesus, considered the sign, and thus knew that it was }{\i\f0 \lquote \lquote the last hour,\rdblquote }{\f0  and that his master was soon to appear.
\par 
\par It appears from the 2nd Epistle of Peter, chapter iii., that there were}{\i\f0  }{\f0 many in his days who scoffed at his master, saying, contemptuously, \ldblquote where is the promise of his coming ?\rdblquote  And Peter re
plies by telling them that their contempt is misplaced, for that \ldblquote one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.\rdblquote  John, in the 1st chapter of Revelations, says, concerning the coming of Jesus, 
\ldblquote Behold he cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also }{\i\f0 which pierced him, and all }{\f0 kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him.\rdblquote 
 And in the last chapter of Revelations he represents Jesus, as saying, \ldblquote  Surely I come quickly\rdblquote !
\par 
\par In short, the Apostles, when they wanted to encourage their desponding proselytes, they usually did it with such words as these,\emdash \rdblquote Be anxious for nothing, }{\i\f0 the Lord is at hand.\rdblquote }{\f0 \emdash \rdblquote Behold! the Judge }{
\i\f0 standeth before the day.\rdblquote  }{\f0 \emdash  \ldblquote Be patient, therefore, brethren, (says James) for the coming of the Lord }{\i\f0 cometh nigh.\rdblquote }{\f0 
 And this persuasion did not end, as might be expected, with that century; for we find that the heathens frequently laughed at the expec- tations of the Primitive Christians, who, till the }{\i\f0 fourth}{\f0  century, never gave up the expectation of th
e impending advent of their master. Nay, so rooted was the idea in their minds, that, understanding the words of Jesus concerning John, \ldblquote  if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee,\rdblquote 
 to mean that that disciple should not die, but survive till the glorious appearance of his lord, so far were they from being convinced of the vanity of their expectations by that Apostle\rquote s }{\i\f0 actual decease,}{\f0 
 that they insisted, that, though he was }{\i\f0 buried,}{\f0  he was not }{\i\f0 dead,}{\f0  but only }{\i\f0 slept,}{\f0  and that the earth over his }{\i\f0 body rose and fell}{\f0  with the action of his }{\i\f0 breathing! !
\par 
\par }{\f0 It is now hardly necessary to add, that Jesus did not at all answer the character of a true prophet, when }{\i\f0 tested}{\f0  by the criterion laid down in Deuteronomy for ascertaining the truth of the claims of a prophet to a divine mission.

\par 
\par Let us now see, whether he taught the worship of other beings beside the Eternal, for if he did, the }{\i\f0 other test}{\f0  laid down in Deuteronomy will also decide against him. Now, did he not command the worship of himself in these words, \ldblquote 
 All men should honour the Son, }{\i\f0 even as they honour the Father?\rdblquote  }{\f0 
This, certainly, commands to render to Jesus the same homage which is rendered to God. I might prove that his disciples did worship him, by referring to many passages in the New Testame
nt, especially in the Revelations, in the latter part of which, Jesus is represented as saying, \ldblquote  I am the Alpha, and the Omega, the beginning, and the end, the first, and, the last,\rdblquote 
 terms applied to the Eternal in Isaiah, where God says, (as if in express opposition to such doctrine) that \ldblquote there is no God }{\i\f0 with him:}{\f0  He knows not any; there was none before him, neither shall there be any after him.\rdblquote 
 I could also adduce many passages relating to the Eternal of Hosts, quoted from the Old Testament, and applied in the New to Jesus. Witness \ldblquote the following :\emdash 
John xii. 41, alludes to Isaiah vi. 5 ; Revelations i. 8, .11, 17, and ii. 8, to Isaiah xli. 4, xliii. 11, and xliv. 6; John xxi. 16, 17, and Revelations ii. 23, to 1st Kings viii. 39 ; John vii. 9, Jeremiah xi. 20, and xvii. 20}{\i\f0 ,}{\f0 
 Revelations xx. 12,. to Isaiah xl. 10; and, to crown all, Jesus, in Revelations i. 13, 14,15, 16, 17, is described in almost the same words as is the Supreme God; \ldblquote the Ancient of Days\rdblquote  in Daniel, 7th chapter; and were there not other 
proofs in abundance to this purpose, this resemblance  alone would decide me.
\par 
\par I now leave it to the cool judgment of the reader, whether Jesus prophecied truly, or did, or did not, teach the duty of paying religious homage to other beings besides God ? an
d, if so, it is consequent, according to the tests by Christians acknowledged to be given by God himself in Deuteronomy, that if Jesus was not sent by, or from, him; for if he was \emdash  God\rquote s own words would be contradicted by God\rquote 
s own deeds.}{\i\f0 
\par 
\par }{\f0 CHAPTER XVI.
\par 
\par EXAMINATION OF THE EVIDENCE, EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL, IN FAVOR OF THE CREDIBILITY OF }{\i\f0 THE}{\f0  GOSPEL HISTORY.
\par 
\par }{\i\f0 In}{\f0  the preceding chapters, I have taken the New Testament as I found it, and have argued }{\i\f0 upon the supposition}{\f0  that Jesus and the apostles }{\i\f0 really }{\f0 
said, and reasoned, as has been stated. I will now endeavour to show, by an examination of the authenticity of the four gospels, that it is }{\i\f0 not certain }{\f0 that they were really guilty of such mistakes as are related of them in those books.

\par 
\par }{\cs16\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20 The reader is r
equested by the author to understand, and bear in mind, that it is not at all intended by any of the observations contained in this chapter on the histories of the four evangelists, to reflect upon, or to disparage, the characters of Matthew, Mark, Luke, 
and John, under whose names they go ; because he believes, and thinks it is proved in this chapter, that the real authors of these histories were }{\i\f0\fs20 very different  persons}{\f0\fs20 
 from the Apostles of Jesus ; and that, in fact, the accounts were not written till the middle of the second century, about a hundred year\rquote s after }{\i\f0\fs20 the supposed}{\f0\fs20 
 authors of them were dead. Of course, none of the observations contained in the chapter relative to these histories, ware considered, or intended, to apply to any of the twelve apostle
s, who were not men who could make such mistakes as will be pointed out. These mistakes belong entirely to the authors }{\i\f0\fs20 who have assumed}{\f0\fs20  their names.\emdash E.
\par }}}{\f0 The life and doctrines of Jesus, and his followers, are contained in the pieces composing the volume called the New Testament. The }{\i\f0 genuineness}{\f0 
 of the books, i. e., whether they were written by those to whom they are ascribed, must be judged of, from the external testimony concerning them, and from internal marks in the books themselves; for the miraculous acts therein, and therein }{\i\f0 only,
}{\f0  contained and related, cannot prove the truth and authenticity of the books, because the authority and credibility of the books themselves must be firmly established, before the miracles related in them can reasonably be admitted as real facts.

\par 
\par Now, the }{\i\f0 external}{\f0  evidence in favour of these books, is the testimony of those men called \ldblquote  the fathers ;\rdblquote 
 and as the value of testimony depends upon the character of the witnesses, it would be proper, first, to state as much as, can b
e learned of these men. As time will not permit me to adduce all that might be said upon this subject, I shall here only take upon me to assert, that they were most credulous, superstitious, and weak men, and, what is worse, made no scruple of falsifying,
 to support and favour what they called \ldblquote  the cause of truth;\rdblquote 
 for they were writers of apocryphal books, attributing them to the apostles, and, moreover, great miracle-mongers, who vamped up stories of prodigies to delude their followers, and which they th
emselves knew to be false. I say, I take upon me to assert this; and to confirm and establish this accusation, I refer the reader to Dr. Middleton\rquote s \ldblquote Free Enquiry,\rdblquote 
 a learned Christian, who, therefore, had no interest to misrepresent this matter; and he will there find these accusations amply verified, and traits of character }{\i\f0 proved}{\f0 
 upon them. By no means favourable to the credibility of their testimony.
\par 
\par The first of these Fathers whose testimony is usually adduced to prove the authenticity of the Gospels, is }{\i\f0 Papias,}{\f0  a Disciple of John. The character given of him by Eusebius is, that \ldblquote  he was a superstitious, and credulous man.
\rdblquote  And this is easily proved by recording some of the stories, concerning Jesus, and his followers, written by this Papias in a book extant in the time of }{\i\f0 Eusebius.}{\f0  One of these stories is mentioned by }{\i\f0 Irenoeus,}{\f0 
 who says, that Papias had it from }{\i\f0 John;}{\f0  who, according to Papias, said, that }{\i\f0 Jesus}{\f0  said, that\emdash \rdblquote  The days shall come, in which there shall be vines, which shall severally have }{\i\f0 ten thousand branches;}{
\f0  and }{\i\f0 every one}{\f0  of these branches shall have }{\i\f0 ten thousand lesser branches;}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 every one}{\f0  of these branches shall have }{\i\f0 ten thousand twigs;}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 every one of}{\f0  these twigs shall have }{
\i\f0 ten thousand clusters of grapes;}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 every one of}{\f0  these grapes }{\i\f0 being pressed}{\f0  shall yield }{\i\f0 two hundred and seventy-five gallons of wine.}{\f0 
 And when a man shall take hold of any of these sacred bunches, another bunch shall }{\i\f0 cry out}{\f0  \ldblquote  I am a better bunch, take me, and bless the Lord by me!\rdblquote  There\rquote s a }{\i\f0 Munchausen}{\f0 
 for you, reader! Well! this Papias is the first witness who lived after Matthew, who has spoken of his Gospel. He lived about the year 116 after Jesus. And what does he say of it ? Why this. \ldblquote  Matthew composed a wri
ting of the Oracles (meaning without doubt the Doctrines of the Gospel,) in the }{\i\f0 Hebrew}{\f0  Language, and every one interpreted them as he was able.\rdblquote 
 So far as this Testimony goes it is positive evidence, that the only Gospel of Matthew extant in 116, was extant in }{\i\f0 Hebrew ;}{\f0  and there was then no }{\i\f0 translation, of it,}{\f0  for \ldblquote every one interpreted as he was able.
\rdblquote  The present gospel called of Matthew was then not written by him, for it is }{\i\f0 in Greek.}{\f0  And that it has not at all }{\i\f0 the air}{\f0  of being a translation is asserted 
by most of the learned. As it stands then, it was not written by Matthew: and that it cannot be a translation of Matthew\rquote 
s Hebrew, is not only plain from the circumstance of its style, and other marks understood by Biblical Critics, but can also be proved by }{\i\f0 another story}{\f0  related by this same Papias concerning the manner of the death of Judas. \ldblquote 
 His body, and head (says Papias) became so }{\i\f0 swollen,}{\f0  that at length he could not get through a street in Jerusalem, where }{\i\f0 two chariots might pass abreast,}{\f0  and having fallen to the ground, he\emdash burst asunder.
\par 
\par Now though this ridiculous story is undoubtedly false, yet it is not credible that Papias, who had so great a reverence for the Apostles as to collect and gather all \ldblquote their sayings,\rdblquote  would so flatly by }{\i\f0 his}{\f0  story of
 the death of Judas contradict the story of Matthew, if the Hebrew Gospel of Matthew contained that part of the Greek Gospel of Matthew which relates the manner of Judas\rquote  Death.
\par 
\par Justin Martyr lived }{\i\f0 after}{\f0  Papias, in the middle of the second century; and th
ough he relates many circumstances agreeing in the main with those recorded in the Gospels, and appears to quote sayings of Jesus from some book or books; yet it is substantially acknowledged by Dr. Marsh, the learned annotator on Michaelis\rquote 
s Introduction, that these quotations are so unlike the }{\i\f0 words,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 circumstances}{\f0 
 in the received Evangelists to which they appear to correspond, that one of two things must be true; either, that Justin, who lived 140 years after Jesus, had }{\i\f0 never seen}{\f0  any of the }{\i\f0 present Gospels;}{\f0  or else, that they }{\i\f0 
were in his time}{\f0  in }{\i\f0 a very different  state}{\f0  from what }{\i\f0 they now are.
\par 
\par }{\f0 The next Christian father who mentions the Gospel of Matthew is }{\i\f0 Irenoeus,}{\f0  who says also that \ldblquote Matthew wrote his gospel in the Hebrew Language.\rdblquote   The character
 of Irenoeus is discoverable from his work against the Heresies of his time, to that I refer the Reader, who will find him to have been a zealous, though a very credulous, and ignorant man; for he believed the story of Papias just quoted, and many others 
equally absurd. He however furnishes this important intelligence, that in the second century, the Christian world was overrun with heresy, and a swarm of apocryphal, and spurious Books were received by many as genuine.
\par 
\par The next witness in favour of the Gospel is }{\i\f0 Tertullian,}{\f0 
 who lived in the latter end of the second century. And the soundness of his Judgment, and his capability to distinguish the genuine Gospels from among a hundred apocryphal ones, and above all }{\i\f0 his regard for truth,}{\f0  may be judged of from t
hese proofs given by himself. He asserts upon }{\i\f0 his own knowledge,. \ldblquote  I know it,\rdblquote }{\f0  says he\emdash  \ldblquote  that the corpse of a dead Christian, at the first breath of the prayer made by the priest, }{\i\f0 
on occasion of its own funeral,}{\f0  removed }{\i\f0 its hands from its sides, into}{\f0  the usual posture of a supplicant; and when the service was ended, restored them again }{\i\f0 to their former situation.\rdblquote }{\f0 
 (Tertul. de anima c. 51.) And he relates as a fact, which he, and all the orthodox of his time credited, that\emdash  \ldblquote  the body of another Christian already interred }{\i\f0 moved itself to one side of the grave}{\f0 
 to make room for another corpse which was going to be laid by it.\rdblquote  And it is on the testimony of such men as }{\i\f0 these, }{\f0 that the authenticity of the gospels }{\i\f0 entirely depends}{\f0  as to external evidence; for these are }{
\i\f0 all}{\f0  the witnesses that can be produced as speaking of them, who lived }{\i\f0 within two hundred years}{\f0  after Jesus: }{\i\f0 Three}{\f0  men, (for Justin cannot be reckoned as a witness in favour of the gospels.) }{\i\f0 Three men,}{\f0 
 who are all of them evidently }{\i\f0 credulous,}{\f0  and two of whom are certainly *****.
\par 
\par To convince a thinking man that histories recording such very extraordinary, ill supported, improbable facts as are contained in the gospels are }{\i\f0 divine,}{\f0  or even }{\i\f0 really}{\f0  written by the men to whom they are ascribed, and are not
 either some of the many spurious productions with which (as we learn from Irenoeus) that early age abounded, calculated to astonish the credulous, and superstitious, or else writings of authors who were themselves infected with the grossest superstitious
 credulity; of what use can it be to adduce the testimony of the very few writers, of the same, or next succeeding age, when the very reading of their works shews him that }{\i\f0 they themselves}{\f0 
 were tainted with that same superstitious credulity, of which are accused the real authors of the New Testament?
\par 
\par It is an obvious rule in the admission of evidence in any cause whatsoever, that }{\i\f0 the more important the matter to be determined by it is, the more unsullied and unexceptionable ought the characters of the witnesses to be.}{\f0 
 And when no court of Justice, in determining a question of fraud to the amount of six pence, will admit the\rquote  testimony of witnesses who are themselves }{\i\f0 notoriously convicted}{\f0  of the }{\i\f0 same offence}{\f0  of which the defendant is 
}{\i\f0 accused ; }{\f0 how can it be expected, that any reasonable, unprejudiced person, should admit }{\i\f0 similar evidence}{\f0  to be of weight, in a case of the }{\i\f0 greatest importance possible,}{\f0 
 not to himself only; but to the whole human race ?
\par 
\par But there is still a greater defect in the testimony of those early writers, than their superstitious credulity, I mean their disregard of }{\i\f0 honour,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 veracity,}{\f0  in whatever concerned the cause of their particular system.
\par 
\par Though Luke asserts, that }{\i\f0 many}{\f0  (even before he wrote his histories for the use of Theophilus,)
 had written upon the same subject: (who of course must have been of the Jewish nation,) and many more must have been written afterwards, whose writings must have been particularly valuable yet so singularly industrious have the fathers, and succeeding so
ns of the orthodox church been, in destroying every writing upon the subject of Christianity, which they could not by some means, or other, apply to the support of their own unholy superstition, that no work of importance of any Christian writer, within }
{\i\f0 the three first centuries,}{\f0  hath been permitted to come down to u}{\i\f0 s,}{\f0 
 except those books which they have thought fit to adopt, and transmit to us as the canon of apostolic scripture; and the works of a few other writers, who were all of them, not only converts f
rom Paganism, but men who had been educated and well instructed in the Philosophic Schools of the latter Platonists, and Pythagoreans.
\par 
\par The established maxim of these schools was, that it was not lawful only, but }{\i\f0 commendable to}{\f0  deceive, and assert falsehoods for the sake of promoting what they considered as the cause of truth and piety, and the }{\i\f0 effects of}{\f0 
  this maxim, which was fully acted upon by both orthodox Christians, and heretics, produced a multiplicity of false, and spurious writings wherewith the second century abounded.
\par 
\par Nay, they did not spare from the operation of this maxim, the scriptures themselves. For they stuffed their copies of the Septuagint with a number of interpolated pretended prophecies concerning Jesus, and his death upon the cross;
 forgeries as weak, and contemptible, and clumsy in themselves, as they were impious and wicked. Whoever desires to see a number of them; may find them in the dispute, or dialogue of Justin with Trypho the Jew; where he will see the simple Justin bringing
 them out passage after passage against the stubborn Israelite, who contents himself with coolly answering, that these marvellous prophecies were not to be found in his Hebrew bible!
\par 
\par There is also another well known, incontrovertible proof of the deceit and falsehood of the leading Christians of early times, of which every person in the least conversant with the ecclesiastical history of those times must be convinced\emdash 
their pretended power of working miracles! On this subject I shall say nothing, but refer the reader to the work of Dr. Middleton already mentioned, for an ample account of their lying wonders, which they imposed as miraculous upon the simple people.

\par 
\par With regard to the }{\i\f0 internal evidence}{\f0  for the authenticity of the writings; composing the New Testament, it is }{\i\f0 still less satisfactory}{\f0 
 than the external evidence. And this may be well believed, when the reader is informed that the great }{\i\f0 Semler,}{\f0  after spending his life in the study of ecclesiastical history; and antiquities, which he is allowed to hav
e understood better than any before him, affirmed to his astonished coreligionists, that, except the Gospel of John, and the Apocalypse, the whole New Testament was a collection of }{\i\f0 forgeries}{\f0 
 written by the partizans of the Jewish and Gentile parties in the Christian church, and entitled apostolic, in order the better to answer their purpose. This opinion has been in part adopted in England, by a learned and shrewd clergyman named }{\i\f0 
Evanson,}{\f0  who has almost demonstrated, that the Greek Gospel of Matthew was written in the second century after the birth of Jesus by }{\i\f0 a Gentile.}{\f0  For he proves that it could not be written by a Jew, on account }{\i\f0 of geographical}{
\f0  mistakes, and manifest ignorance of }{\i\f0 Jewish customs.}{\f0  He also gives good reasons for rejecting the authenticity 
of some of the epistles. In short, he has poured such a flood of light upon the eyes of his terrified brethren, as will, ere long, no doubt enable them to see a little clearer than heretofore.
\par 
\par He gives several instances of geographical blunders in Matthew. I shall mention only one.  Matthew says, in the 2nd chapter, that when Joseph, the husband of Mary, returned from Egypt, \ldblquote 
hearing that Archelaus reigned in Judea, he was afraid to go thither, and therefore turned aside, into the parts of Galilee.\rdblquote  Now this, as will appear from a map of Palestine, is just like saying, \ldblquote a man at }{\i\f0 Philadelphia,}{\f0 
 intending to go to the State }{\i\f0 of New York,}{\f0  on his route heard something which made him afraid to go thither, and therefore he }{\i\f0 turned aside\emdash into Boston!\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 That the author of that Gospel was ignorant of Jewish customs will be evident from the following circumstances. He says Jesus told Peter, that before }{\i\f0 the cock crew}{\f0 
 he would deny him thrice; and that afterwards, when Peter was cursing and swearing, saying  \ldblquote I know not the man ! immediately the cock crew.\rdblquote 
 Now it is unfortunate for the credit of this story, that it is well known, that in conformity with Jewish customs, at that time subsisting, no cocks were allowed to be in Jerusalem, where Jesus was apprehended. This is k
nown, and acknowledged by learned Christians, who have extricated themselves from this difficulty, by proving that the crowing of the cock, here mentioned, does not mean, as it appears to mean, }{\i\f0 absolutely}{\f0 
 the crowing of a cock, but that it means\emdash what dost thou think reader? why it means\emdash - the sound of a }{\i\f0 trumpet! !}{\cs16\i\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20 
That the pretended Gospel of Matthew was not written by Matthew, or by }{\i\f0\fs20 an, inhabitant of Palestine,}{\f0\fs20 
 may also be inferred, I think, from the blundering attempts of the author of it to give the meaning of some expressions uttered by Jesus, and used by the Jews, }{\i\f0\fs20 in the language of the country,}{\f0\fs20 
 which was the Syro Chaldaic; and which the}{\i\f0\fs20  real}{\f0\fs20  Matthew could hardly be ignorant of. For instance, he says that Golgotha signifies\emdash }{\i\f0\fs20 \rdblquote the place of a skull.\rdblquote }{\f0\fs20 
 Matthew xxvii. 33. Now, this is not true, for Golgotha, or as it should have been written, }{\i\f0\fs20 Golgoltha,}{\f0\fs20  does not signify \ldblquote  }{\i\f0\fs20 the place of a skull,\rdblquote }{\f0\fs20  but simply \ldblquote  }{\i\f0\fs20 
a skull.\rdblquote }{\f0\fs20  The Gospels according to Mark, and John, are guilty of the same mistake, and thus betray the same marks of }{\i\f0\fs20 Gentilism.}{\f0\fs20  Again, the pretended Matthew says, that Jesus cried on the cross, }{\i\f0\fs20 
\ldblquote }{\f0\fs20  Eli Eli lama, sabackthani,\rdblquote  which he says meant, \ldblquote My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me ?\rdblquote 
 (Matthew xxvii. 46.) If the reader will look at what Michaelis, in his introduction to the New Testament, says upon this subject, he will find the }{\i\f0\fs20 real Syro}{\f0\fs20  Chaldaic expression which must have been used by Jesus, to be so }{
\i\f0\fs20 different}{\f0\fs20  from the one given by the supposed Matthew, that he will, (and the observation is not meant as a disparagement to the }{\i\f0\fs20 real}{\f0\fs20 
 Matthew, who certainly had no hand in the imposition of the Gospel covered with his name) I suspect be inclined to believe, }{\i\f0\fs20 that this pretended}{\f0\fs20  Matthew\rquote s knowledge of the vulgar language of the Jews, used in Christ\rquote 
s time, must have been about upon a par with the honest sailor\rquote s knowledge of French; who assured his countrymen, on his return home, that the French called a horse a shovel and a hat a }{\i\f0\fs20 chopper !\emdash }{\f0\fs20 E.
\par }}}{\i\f0 
\par 
\par }{\f0 According to Luke, as soon as Jesus was dead, Joseph of Arimathea went to Pilate, and begged his body, and }{\i\f0 hasted}{\f0  to bury it, because the }{\i\f0 Sabbath }{\f0 
(which began at sunset,) drew on; that his female disciples attended the burial; observed how the body was placed in the sepulchre, and returned and prepared spices and ointments to embalm it with, }{\i\f0 before}{\f0 
 the Sabbath commenced ; and then rested the Sabbath day, according to the commandment.
\par 
\par The pretended Matthew, however, tells us, that \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 when the even was come }{\f0 (i. e., when the Sabbath day was }{\i\f0 actually begun,)}{\f0  Joseph went to beg the body \emdash 
took it down, wrapped it in linen, and buried it; and that Mary Magdalene and the other Mary, were sitting over against the sepulchre. From the time that this writer has thought fit to allot for the burial of Jesus, it is evident, that he was not only }{
\i\f0 no Jew,}{\f0  but so ignorant of the customs .of the Jews, that he }{\i\f0 did }{\f0 not know that }{\i\f0 their day}{\f0  always began with }{\i\f0 the evening, or}{\f0 
 he would never have employed, Joseph in doing what no Jew would, nor dared to have done, after the }{\i\f0 commencement}{\f0  of the Sabbath. He takes no notice at all of the preparation made by the women, mentioned by 
Luke; for that would not have agreed with the sequel of his story. But to make up for that omission, he informs us of a circumstance not mentioned at all by the other Evangelists. For he tells us that \ldblquote 
 on the next day which followeth the day of preparation, the Chief Priests, and Pharisees came together unto Pilate,\rdblquote  &c.  \ldblquote The next day which followeth the day of preparation! !\rdblquote  \emdash 
such is the periphrasis that he uses for the Sabbath day! It is well known that among the Jews it was, and is, customary to prepa
re, and set out, in the afternoon of the Friday, all the food and necessaries for every family during the Sabbath day. Because they were forbidden to light }{\i\f0 a fire,}{\f0 
 or do any servile work, on that day; and therefore Friday was very properly called \ldblquote the day of preparation.\rdblquote  But it appears to me next to impossible, that any }{\i\f0 Jew}{\f0  would call }{\i\f0 the sabbath}{\f0  \ldblquote 
the day that followeth the day of the preparation.\rdblquote  Yet this singular historian so denominates it, and moreover, goes on to inform us, that the chief priests, an
d Pharisees went to Pilate to ask for a guard to place round the sepulchre, till the third day, to prevent his disciples from stealing away his body, and then saying, that he was risen from the dead; and that after obtaining }{\i\f0 the}{\f0  governor
\rquote s permission, \ldblquote they, went, and secured the sepulchre by }{\i\f0 sealing the stone}{\f0  that was rolled against it; and setting a watch.\rdblquote  Though there appears nothing very strange in this account to a }{\i\f0 Christian,}{\f0 
 yet, I assure my reader, that to the Jews, it ever did, and must appear utterly incredible. For it is }{\i\f0 wonderful!}{\f0  that the }{\i\f0 Jewish rulers,}{\f0  and the }{\i\f0 rigorous Pharisees}{\f0  should in so }{\i\f0 public a manner}{\f0 
 thus violate the precept for observing the Sabbath day; for the penalty of this action of theirs was no less than }{\i\f0 death!}{\f0  More wonderful sti
ll is it that they should have so much better attended to, and comprehended the meaning of the prediction of Jesus to his disciples, than his own disciples did; and most wonderful of all, that a }{\i\f0 Roman Proconsul}{\f0 
 should consent to let his troops keep watch round a tomb, for fear it should be thought that a dead man was come to life again. 
\par 
\par But though our author\rquote s history of these extraordinary facts is neither consistent with reason, and probability, nor with the other histories of the same event}{\i\f0 ;}{\f0  it proceed
s in pretty strict conformity to the manner in which it sets out. For to convince us still more fully that the author was totally ignorant of the mode of computing time in use among the Jews, and habituated to that in use among the Greeks and Romans? He r
eckons the Sabbath to last till }{\i\f0 day light}{\f0  on Sunday morn, and says, (chapter xxviii.), \ldblquote  that in the }{\i\f0 end}{\f0  of the }{\i\f0 Sabbath,}{\f0  as it began to }{\i\f0 dawn,}{\f0  towards }{\i\f0 the first day}{\f0 
 of the week,\rdblquote  the two Marys before mentioned, came, (not as in Luke, to embalm the body, for, with a guard round the sepulchre, that would have been impracticable, but) }{\i\f0 to see the sepulchre.}{\f0  \ldblquote 
Whilst they were there, the author tells us, there was another great earthqua
ke, and an angel descended, rolled away the stone, and sat upon it, at whose sight, the soldiers trembled, and were frighted to death. But to prevent the like effect of his appearance upon the women, he said unto them, fear not }{\i\f0 ye,}{\f0 
 for I know that ye seek 
Jesus who was crucified. That the women as well as the soldiers were present at the descent of this angel, appears not only from there being nobody else, by whom these uncommon circumstances could have been related, but also by the pronoun personal }{
\i\f0 ye,}{\f0  inserted in the original Greek, which in that language is never done, unless it be emphatically to mark such a distinction, or antithesis, as there was on this occasion, between }{\i\f0 them }{\f0 and the }{\i\f0 Roman guard.}{\f0 
 Here, however, the author }{\i\f0 is}{\f0  inadvertently inconsistent with }{\i\f0 himself,}{\f0 
 as well as with the other evangelists; and forgetting that the sole intent of rolling away the stone, was to open a passage, absolutely necessary to the body of Jesus to come forth out of the sepulchre; and that if he had risen and come forth }{\i\f0 
after}{\f0  the angel had rolled it away, both the women and the soldiers must }{\i\f0 have seen him rise,}{\f0  he makes the angel bid them look into the sepulchre, to see\emdash that he }{\i\f0 was not}{\f0  there! and tell them that he was }{\i\f0 
already risen;}{\f0  and that he was }{\i\f0 gone before them into Galilee,}{\f0  where they }{\i\f0 should see him!}{\f0  In their way, the author adds, Jesus himself met the women, and said, \ldblquote 
 be not afraid, go tell my brethren to go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.\rdblquote  He says that the eleven apostles went into Galilee, to an appo
inted mountain, and saw him there; notwithstanding that some of them were so incredulous, as not to believe even the testimony of their own senses.
\par 
\par In the interim, whilst the women were going to the apostles, the author tells us, \ldblquote some of the watch;\rdblquote  some strictly disciplined Roman soldiers left their station to bring an account of what had passed, not to the Governor their }{
\i\f0 General,}{\f0  nor to any of }{\i\f0 their own officers\emdash }{\f0 but to the }{\i\f0 chief priests of the Jews!}{\f0  that they assembled a council of the elders upon the o
ccasion, and after deliberating what was to be done, induced the soldiers, by large bribes, }{\i\f0 to}{\f0  run the risk of being put to death themselves, upon the highly improbable chance of the Jewish rulers having influence sufficient with the Roman }
{\i\f0 Proconsul to}{\f0  prevail on him to submit to the indelible infamy of neglecting }{\i\f0 the}{\f0  discipline of the army under his command, to such a degree, as to suffer an entire guard of soldiers }{\i\f0 avowedly to sleep}{\f0 
 upon their station, without any notice being taken of it! and to say \ldblquote his disciples came and stole him away }{\i\f0 whilst we slept.\rdblquote }{\f0  This incredible story is another instance how necessary it is, that those who do }{\i\f0 not}{
\f0  adhere closely to the truth, should have extraordinary good memories to enable them to keep clear of absurdities, or p
alpable contradictions in their narrations. For, consider the circumstances. How were the tongues of these soldiers to be restrained among the inquisitive inhabitants of a large city, (at that time too, greatly crowded on account of the paschal feast,) no
t
 only in their way to the chief priests; but also during the whole time while the priests assembled the Sanhedrim, and were deliberating what was to be done ? And if that part of the watch, who, the author says, came to inform the chief priests, were polt
roons enough for the sake of a bribe to undergo so shameful a disgrace to themselves, as well as to hazard the resentment of their General, how could they undertake that }{\i\f0 all their comrades}{\f0 
 who remained at the sepulchre would do the same ? and to }{\i\f0 what purpose}{\f0  could the Jewish council bribe }{\i\f0 some,}{\f0 
 without a possibility of some one knowing how the rest of the corps would act? And even supposing all these difficulties surmounted, and that the whole guard had agreed, and persisted in saying, \ldblquote  his disciples stole him away while we slept,
\rdblquote  of what service could that be to the Jewish rulers ? For if the guards }{\i\f0 were asleep,}{\f0  they could be no evidence to prove that the body }{\i\f0 was taken away; }{\f0 
and it might be just as probable that he might rise to life again while the watch was asleep, as it was if no watch had been set.
\par 
\par In a word, it appears from the numbers of Latin words in Greek characters, which this book contains; from the numerous geographical blunders; and the author\rquote s evident ignorance of the customs of the Jews: f
rom the form of Baptism enjoined at the conclusion, which was not in use in the first century, as appears from the form mentioned as then used in the Acts; from the Roman Centurion\rquote s being made to call Jesus \ldblquote a Son of a God,\rdblquote 
 which words in the mouth of a 
Pagan could only mean that he must be a Demigod, like Bacchus, Hercules, or Esculapius: it is clear that this Gospel is the patched work composition of some convert from the Pagan schools. At any rate, his gospel flatly contradicts the others in several i
mportant particulars in the history of the Resurrection. For he represents the apostles as being commanded by the Angel and by Jesus, }{\i\f0 to go to Galilee,}{\f0  in order to see him; and that they }{\i\f0 went there,}{\f0 
 and saw him on a mountain. Yet it is said by the other Evangelists, see Luke, ch. 24, and Acts 1, that he appeared on the saw }{\i\f0 day}{\f0  of the resurrection to }{\i\f0 Peter}{\f0  at }{\i\f0 Jerusalem;}{\f0 
 to two other disciples as they went to Emmaus ; and on the }{\i\f0 succeeding night}{\f0  to this }{\i\f0 whole}{\f0  congregation of the Disciples, not in }{\i\f0 Galilee,}{\f0  but in }{\i\f0 Jerusalem,}{\f0  and that by his }{\i\f0 express command}{
\f0  the apostles did }{\i\f0 not}{\f0  go into Galilee, but }{\i\f0 remained}{\f0  at }{\i\f0 Jerusalem}{\f0  till the feast of Pentecost.
\par 
\par But as this author differs from the other Evangelists, so they also differ among themselves. And the latter part of the last chapter of Mark is so irreconcilable to the other historians of the resurrection, that in many Manuscripts it is found }{\i\f0 
omitted.}{\f0  And that gospel ends in }{\i\f0 them,}{\f0  at the eighth Terse of the last chapter. And Mr. West, in his attempted reconciliation of
 their accounts of the resurrection, is obliged to make a number of postulates, to take a number of things for granted, which might be denied: and after elaborately arranging the stage for the performance, he sets the women, and the disciples a driving ba
c
kwards, and forwards, from the city to the sepulchre, and from the sepulchre to the city, and so agitated that they forgot to know each other when they cross in their journeys. Notwithstanding his great ingenuity in reconciling contradictions, in which he
 beats Surenhusius himself, he makes but a sorry piece of work of it after all. He had much letter have let it alone; for his work upon the resurrection which he calls \ldblquote  the main fact of Christianity,\rdblquote 
 displays these contradictions in so glaring a light, that the very laboured ingenuity of his methods of reconciliation, inevitably, suggests \ldblquote  confirmation strong\rdblquote 
 to the keen-eyed reader, of that irreconcilability which the author endeavors to refute.  What rational man therefore can reasonably be required to
 believe the story of a resurrection pretended to have been seen and known, only by the party interested in making it believed! when in their testimony even, they do not agree but contradict each other ?
\par 
\par There is really an immense number of discrepancies and contradiction in the New Testament which the acumen of learned Christians has of late discovered, and pointed out to the world. And Mr. Evanson, in his work on \ldblquote 
the Dissonance of the four Evangelists,\rdblquote  has collected a mass enough, I should think, to te
rrify the most determined Reconciliator that ever lived. It is a little remarkable, that Mr. Evanson has asserted, and has proved, the spuriosness of the Gospel ascribed to John, which Semler spared, in the general wreck which he made of the authenticity 
of the other books of the New Testament. Mr. Evanson says, in his examination of it, what has been said before, that the speeches ascribed to Jesus in it, are most }{\i\f0 incoherent, contradictory,}{\f0  and falsified by }{\i\f0 well known facts.}{\f0 
 And indeed the author of the book itself, sterns to be sensible of this ; for he very naturally represents the Jews repeatedly accusing Jesus of being }{\i\f0 mad. \ldblquote }{\f0 
 He hath a devil, and is mad, (say they to the multitude) why hear ye him ?\rdblquote  and so in other places. Mr. Evanson considers this work as the composition of a converted Platonist or of a\rdblquote  }{\i\f0 Platonizing Jew;}{\f0 
 the latter we think to be the most correct opinion; since it is evident that the author of }{\i\f0 that}{\f0  gospel had the works of Philo at his fingers\rquote  ends, which is more than can be supposed of John. As Semler excepted the Gospel of John }{
\i\f0 only,}{\f0  so Mr. Evanson excepts the Gospel of Luke }{\i\f0 only}{\f0  from the charge of spuriousness: though he says that it is grossly corrupted, and interpolated. From these corrupt
ions and interpolations, he endeavours to purify it; in which attempt wo think he has had very indifferent success. In short, his work has proved, (what he did not himself contemplate) that the providence of the God of truth has taken care, that so many a
b
surdities and contradictions, should be contained in these books of the New Testament which were written to establish a mistake, as must I conceive, satisfy any man, who has them once pointed out to him, that the doctrine of those books is not, and cannot
 be from God.
\par 
\par But it may be still asked, \ldblquote  how did this notion of the resurrection of Jesus become current ?\rdblquote  \ldblquote  How can you account for the apostles believing such a thing ?\rdblquote  We answer sincerely\emdash 
we cannot absolutely ascertain. The Jews of that age have left no documents upon this business. The origin of the Christian religion is so extremely obscure, that Josephus takes }{\i\f0 no notice of it at all,}{\f0 
 (for the passage relating to Christian affairs }{\i\f0 now}{\f0  found in Josephus are notorious interpolations.) And it is evide
nt from the Chronological, and other mistakes about Jesus, in the Talmud, that the curiosity of the learned Jews had never been interested by Christianity, till so long after Jesus, that the memory of him, and his, was almost entirely lost among that nati
on. And it appears from the last chapter of the Acts, that when Paul was received by the Jews at Rome, he had not been considered by the Jews of }{\i\f0 Jerusalem}{\f0  as of }{\i\f0 sufficient  importance,}{\f0 
 as to cause them to warn their brethren of the Dispersion concerning him; for these Jews tell Paul, on his enquiring, that. they had not received any letters concerning him from Jerusalem. So that we can offer nothing but }{\i\f0 conjecture,}{\f0 
 to solve the difficulty.
\par 
\par It has been said by some, (and it is by no means an hypothesis destitute of plausibility) that Jesus was indeed crucified, but did not actually }{\i\f0 die}{\f0 
 on the cross. It is evident that Pilate was extremely desirous to save his life; and is it impossible that the Roman soldiers, who crucified him, had }{\i\f0 secret orders? }{\f0  Consider t
he ciscumstances. He was crucified at our nine in the morning, and was taken from the cross at about three in the afternoon. Now, crucifixion is not a death which kills men in six hours, and men have been known to have lived fastened to the cross for more
 than }{\i\f0 two days. }{\f0 Consider, besides, that when the soldiers gave the }{\i\f0 coup de grace}{\f0  to the two robbers, that they }{\i\f0 did not}{\f0  break the legs of }{\i\f0 Jews.}{\f0 
 This, the author of the Gospel according to John says, they did, in order to fulfill }{\i\f0 a prophecy;}{\f0  but I leave it to my reader, whether it is not more likely that they did so in order to }{\i\f0 fulfill  secret orders ?}{\f0 
 But to make up for that omission, the author adds, that they pierced Jesus with a spear. Now, besides that this is not mentioned by the other Evangelists, the very }{\i\f0 manner}{\f0  in which this circumstance is mentioned, and }{\i\f0 eagerly}{\f0 
 affirmed by him, looks as if the author was aware of the likelihood of a suspicion of the fact we are trying to prove probable, and that he wrote this in order to }{\i\f0 obviate it.}{\f0  And after all, th
e gospel according to John was certainly not written by him, and, therefore, what the author of it observes, may be true, or not. You will observe also, reader, that the body of Jesus was given by Pilate to his friends }{\i\f0 immediately ;}{\f0 
 a favour }{\i\f0 never}{\f0  vouchsafed by the Romans in such a case, except }{\i\f0 \ldblquote speciali gratia.\rdblquote }{\f0  You will observe also, that the body was taken down by }{\i\f0 his friends,}{\f0 
 no doubt with great care; probably was washed from the blood, and }{\i\f0 rubbed perfectly dry;}{\f0  and was deposited in the cave or sepulchre, with a large quantity of }{\i\f0 spices,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 aromatics.}{\f0  Now suppose that Jesus only }{
\i\f0 swooned}{\f0  on the cross, and that his naked body, after being cleansed as aforesaid, was laid in the new sepulchre where the air was cool and fresh, wrapped in a considerable quantity of }{\i\f0 dry linen,}{\f0  together with }{\i\f0 
many spices, and aromatics,}{\f0  what could be more opportune, or }{\i\f0 proper, to}{\f0  stimulate his drowsed senses, and recall the unfortunate sufferer to life ? Suppose then, that on awaking from his trance, he disengaged himself, and to
ok himself away as secretly as possible, might not all this have happened ? Is it impossible ? And does it not look plausible ? It is not improbable that he might after this have shewed himself privately to his particular disciples; for you will recollect
, reader, that the appearances of Jesus to his disciples }{\i\f0 after}{\f0  his crucifixion were to }{\i\f0 them, only,}{\f0  and for the most part in }{\i\f0 the night.}{\f0  And it is by no means impossible, that the }{\i\f0 twelve apostles,}{\f0 
 who were, I doubt not, well meaning men, though extremely simp
le and credulous; I say it is thus by no means impossible, that they might have believed sincerely, that their master had risen from the dead. This hypothesis must not be considered only as the brain work of an unbelieving sceptic; for it has been (in its
 main principle) advanced, and elaborately defended by Dr. Paulus the professor of divinity in the principal University in Bavaria.
\par 
\par It is true, that it may be said, that this is all }{\i\f0 hypothesis,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 mere conjecture.}{\f0  We allow it; it is true; and we assert that the account given by the Evangelists is no better, nay, worse than conjecture, as it is a mere }{
\i\f0 forgery}{\f0  of the second century! For no man, we think, who knows all that has been made known by biblical critics, in later years, will now }{\i\f0 seriously }{\f0 contend for the }{\i\f0 literal truth of}{\f0  that account. [See Appendix A.]

\par 
\par If all this will not satisfy the man that \ldblquote  believeth all things,\rdblquote  our last resource is to }{\i\f0 demy the act}{\f0  of this resurrection. And this we can do with perfect }{\i\f0 sang froid,}{\f0  as we know very well that it c
annot be }{\i\f0 proved;}{\f0  for the }{\i\f0 only}{\f0  testimony in favour of it, are the four evangelists; four witnesses, the}{\i\f0  }{\f0 like of whose written testimony, with reference thereto, (being as }{\i\f0 contradic- tory}{\f0  as that is,) 
}{\i\f0 to say no more,}{\f0  certainly would not, we believe, be received in a modern court of justice, to settle }{\i\f0 the fact}{\f0  about a debt of f}{\i\f0 ive dollars.}{\f0  And if it be still urged, that such a story is }{\i\f0 unparalleled,}{
\f0  and therefore respectable; we say that it is not unparalleled; as we have an account of a false Messiah, who }{\i\f0 applied the prophecies to himself,}{\f0  had }{\i\f0 a forerunner,}{\f0  and more than two hundred thousand followers, who }{\i\f0 
publicly acknowledged him for the }{\f0 Messiah, raised contributions, and supported him magnificently. He too, }{\i\f0 quoted the prophets}{\f0  as }{\i\f0 speaking concerning him,}{\f0  and was said to have }{\i\f0 worked divers miracles,}{\f0 
 and was ultimately put to death by the order of the Grand Seignor at Constantinople; yet nevertheless }{\i\f0 was said to have been, seen again }{\f0 by }{\i\f0 certain of his followers,}{\f0  who }{\i\f0 wrote books in favour of that fact,}{\f0  and }{
\i\f0 of his}{\f0  }{\i\f0 Messiahship.}{\f0  Many learned Rabbins enrolled themselves as his disciples, and }{\i\f0 wrote controversial works}{\f0  in his cause, as }{\i\f0 Paul}{\f0 
 did. And to conclude, his party was not entirely extinct within a very few years. Yet, notwithstanding all this, he was an imp
ostor; and no man now believes the stories of his miracles, or his resurrection; notwithstanding that both are affirmed by more recent, more learned, and more respectable testimony than is, or can be, offered, in favour of the Messiahship of Jesus. The na
me of this famous impostor was }{\i\f0 Shabathai Tzevi,}{\f0  and his history is given by Basnage, in his history of the Jews, [and by other writers of Jewish history. See on this}{\i\f0  }{\f0 subject the }{\i\f0 Sepher Torath Hakenaoth,}{\f0 
 page 2. The learned Mr. Zedner has extracted the life of Shabetai Tsebi from tins book, and published it, with a German translation, in his }{\i\f0 Auswahl historischer Stucke aus Hebraischen Schriftstellern,}{\f0  Berlin, 1840.\emdash  D.]
\par 
\par I wish the Christian reader to peruse carefully, and cooly, that account; and if he }{\i\f0 then}{\f0  persists in believing the history given by the evangelists; with such faith as }{\i\f0 his,}{\f0  he certainly }{\i\f0 ought}{\f0 
 to be able to move mountains; and I have no doubt at all, that with such a good natured understanding as his, if he had found in his }{\i\f0 New Testament}{\f0  the story of Jonah misquoted, and and by a }{\i\f0 
small transposition a la mode de Surenhusius,}{\f0  representing that }{\i\f0 \ldblquote  Jonah}{\f0  swallowed }{\i\f0 the whale!\rdblquote }{\f0  this sturdy \ldblquote confidence in }{\i\f0 things not seen}{\f0 ,\rdblquote 
 would, I doubt not have enabled him without difficulty to swallow the prophet }{\i\f0 with the whale in his belly.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\f0 CHAPTER XVII.
\par 
\par OF THE PECULIAR MORALITY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT, AS IT AFFECTS INDIVIDUALS.
\par 
\par I have already expressed my respect for the character of Jesus. And I again declare, that I request it may be distinctly understood, that}{\i\f0  }{\f0 by nothing that I have said do I intend to impeach, or to deprecate }{\i\f0 his moral character.}{\f0 
 Whatever may have been his defects, or whatever were his foibles, they must have been the faults of his mind, not of his heart. For, though he may hare been a mistake
n enthusiast; yet I do firmly believe, That, with such a character as he is represented to have possessed, he could not have been either a hypocrite, or a wilful impostor. And if it be replied, that I have, by some observations on his conduct, indirectly 
impeached the perfection of his moral character; I answer, that if so, it is certainly }{\i\f0 my }{\f0 misfortune, but it may not be his fault;. To explain this observation, I request the reader to recall to mind, that Jesus }{\i\f0 
wrote nothing himself!}{\f0  that the only accounts we have of him, are contained in books, probably apocryphal, }{\i\f0 certainly}{\f0  not }{\i\f0 generally known}{\f0 
 till after the middle of the second- century from his birth. The gospels now extant do not appear to have been known to Justin Martyr; and the earliest fathers, in 
their writings, generally quote traditions concernng Jesus, instead of histories. Since these things are so, who knows, but that the authors of the histories of him now extant, have attributed to him words and actions of which he was guiltless. We}{\i\f0 
 }{\f0 know how
 prone mankind are to invent falsehoods concerning eminent men ; for instance, Mahomet expressly disclaimed the power of working miracles, and yet the writings of his early followers ascribe hundreds to him. Why may it not be possible then, since Jesus wr
o
te nothing himself, that these books ascribe to him words and actions he neither spake nor performed? God grant that this may one day be proved! For I should rejoice to find the meek, gentle, and amiable man of Nazareth proved guiltless of the follies and
 impieties attributed to him in the New Testament }{\i\f0 as I find it,}{\f0 
 and to reason concerning the works and words of Jesus, as I find them there expressed, yet I would earnestly request the reader to consider me willing and desirous to exempt the author, or rather }{\i\f0 the cause}{\f0 
 of the Christian religion, from the reproach of the sentiments I am bound by my regard for one God, and his attributes, to express for the system itself. Yes! I can in my own mind separate Jesus from his religion and his followers. I read with
 admiration many of his beautiful parables. I shall ever contemplate his mildness, and benevolence with respect; and I peruse, with pity, the recital of his sufferings, and cruel death. All this I have done, and }{\i\f0 I}{\f0 
 believe I shall ever do; but I cannot! I cannot, in effect, deny the one living and true God, and renounce my reason, and common sense, by believing all the contradictory and strange doctrines contained in the New Testament.
\par 
\par Having unburthened my mind upon this subject, and frankly expressed my s
entiments and feelings with regard to the character of Jesus; I hope I may now be allowed (without incurring the charge of maliciously exposing him, or the twelve apostles, to reproach) to state my opinions with regard to the merit of the }{\i\f0 
moral maxims,}{\f0  ascribed to him and them, in the New Testament. And I again caution the reader, that he is not }{\i\f0 obliged}{\f0  to lay to }{\i\f0 his, }{\f0 or their, }{\i\f0 charge,}{\f0 
 the mischievous consequences that originated from acting upon these maxims and principles, since it is by no means impossible that they may have been }{\i\f0 falsely}{\f0  ascribed to him and to them.
\par 
\par Now then, let us attend to the subject of the chapter, viz., the moral maxims }{\i\f0 ascribed to}{\f0  Jesus. These moral maxims consist of 1st, Those which were adopted by him from the Old Testament. 2d,
 Those of which he himself is described as the author. With the consideration of those of the first class I shall not trouble the reader, but shall devote this chapter to the examination of those which are supposed to have originated from him. These are, 
1st, \lquote  Do to others what you would that others should do to you.\rquote  2d, \lquote  Resist not the injurious person; but if a man smite thee on one cheek, turn to him the other also.\rquote  3d,  If a man ask thy cloak, give him thy coat also.
\rquote  4th, \lquote  If thou wouldest be perfect, sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor; and come follow me.\rquote  5th, \lquote 
 Unless a man hate his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and possessions, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.\rquote  6th, \lquote  Take no thought for the morrow.\rquote 
\par 
\par With regard to the first of these maxims, it does not belong to }{\i\f0 Jesus, as the author.}{\f0  It is found in the book of Tobit, chapter iv. 15, and it was a maxim well known to the Rabbins. It is found in the Talmud }{\i\f0 verbatim. }{\f0 
\ldblquote What thou wouldest not have done to thee, do not thou to another.\rdblquote  (Tal. Bab. Schabbat. fol. 31.) So also }{\i\f0 Hillel}{\f0  addressed a proselyte thus, \ldblquote  What is hateful to thee, do not thou to thy neighbour.\rdblquote 
 Several other expressions of Jesus were, it appears from the Talmud, }{\i\f0 proverbial expressions }{\f0 in use among the Jews. For instance, the original of that saying recorded Matthew vii. 2. \ldblquote  With whatsoever measure ye mete,\rdblquote 
 &c., is found in the Talmud of Babylon (Sanhedrim fol. 100, Sotah, chapter 4, 7, }{\i\f0 8,9.)}{\f0  \ldblquote With whatsoever measure any one metes it shall be measured to him.   So also the original of that expression of \ldblquote 
 Cast out the beam out of thine own }{\i\f0 eye, }{\f0 and then thou shalt see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brother\rquote s eye is to be found }{\i\f0 in}{\f0  the Talmud}{\cs16\f0\super *{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {
\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20\cf1 See Addenda, No. 2.
\par }}}{\f0 .
\par 
\par What is called by Christians \ldblquote the Lord\rquote s Prayer,\rdblquote 
 is merely a few clauses taken from Jewish prayers, and put together. Very many instances of a similar nature to these might be produced; but, as I must be brief, the reader is referred for further satisfaction to
 the works of Lightfoot, where he will learn, by extracts from Jewish writings, the source, and }{\i\f0 meaning}{\f0  of many more of the sayings of Jesus.
\par 
\par I now proceed to the most disagreeable part of the subject, viz.: The consideration of the }{\i\f0 other}{\f0  maxims mentioned, which, it must be allowed, do belong to Jesus, or at least to the New Testament, since they are the }{\i\f0 peculiar }{\f0 
moral principles of Christianity, and the honour of them can be challenged  by, I believe, no other religion.
\par 
\par These precepts are so extremely }{\i\f0 hyperbolical,}{\f0  that they are not, and }{\i\f0 cannot }{\f0 be }{\i\f0 perfectly}{\f0 
 observed by any Christian, who does not detach himself completely from the business of society; and these maxims, (which, as I said before, are the only parts of the morality of the New Testament, which are not }{\i\f0 borrowed,)}{\f0 
 never have been obeyed by any but the primitive Christians ; and by the Monks, and Anchorets; for even the Quakers and Shakers, eminent as they are in Christian morality, have never been able to come }{\i\f0 quite up}{\f0  to the self denial require
d by the New Testament.
\par 
\par Indeed, the moral maxims }{\i\f0 peculiar to}{\f0  Christianity are impracticable, except by one who confines his wealth to the possession of a suit of clothes, }{\i\f0 sad}{\f0 
 wooden platter, and who lives in a cave, or a monastery. They bear the stamp of enthusiasm upon their very front, and we }{\i\f0 have}{\f0  always seen, and ever }{\i\f0 shall}{\f0 
 see, that they are not fit for man : that they lift him out of the sphere in which God designed him to move; that they are useless to society, and frequently produce the most dangerous consequences to it. In a word}{\i\f0 , in}{\f0 
 these maxims we find commands, the fulfillment of which, is impossible by any man who is a }{\i\f0 husband, a father,}{\f0  or a }{\i\f0 citizen.
\par 
\par }{\f0 It is an outrage to human nature, and to common sense, to order a virtuous man, in order to re
ach perfection, to strip himself of his property; to offer the other cheek to receive a new outrage; not to resist the most unjust violence, injury, and insult; not to defend himself, or his property, when \ldblquote  sued at the law;\rdblquote 
 to quit his house and goods, a
nd to hate his parents, and brethren, and wife, and children, for the sake of Jesus; to refuse and reject innocent pleasures; to deny himself lawful enjoyments, appointed by the Creator to make the existence of man a blessing to himself and others.
\par 
\par Who does not see in these commands the language of enthusiasm of hyperbole?  These maxims! are they not directly fitted to discourage, and debase a man? to degrade him in his own eyes, and those }{\i\f0 of}{\f0 
 others ? to plunge him into despair ? And would not the }{\i\f0 literal}{\f0  
fulfillment of them prove destructive to society ? What shall we say of that morality which orders the heart to detach itself from objects, which God, and reason, and nature order it to love? To refuse to enjoy innocent and lawful happiness, \emdash 
what is it bu
t to despise the benefits of God ? What real good can result for society from these melancholy virtues, which Christianity regards as perfections ? Will a man become more useful to society when his mind is perpetually inquieted by imaginary terrors, by mo
urnful thoughts, which prevent him from fulfilling the duties he owes to his family, his country and those with whom he is connected ?
\par 
\par It may be safely said, that enthusiasm is the base of the morality of Christianity; I say, the morality of Christianity, meaning thereby, not the morality of those called Christians, but the morality }{\i\f0 expressed,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 required }{\f0 
in the New Testament. The virtues it recommends, are the virtues caricatured, and rendered extravagant; virtues which divide a man from his neighbour, and plunge him in melancholy, and render him useless, and unhappy  In this world we want }{\i\f0 human}{
\f0  virtues, not those which make a man a misanthrope. Society desires, and wants virtues that help to maintain it, which gives it energy and activity. It wants virtue
s which render families industrious, and united; and which incite, and enable every one to obtain lawful pleasures, and to augment the general felicity. But the peculiar virtues of the New Testament, either debase the mind by overwhelming fears, or intoxi
cate it with visionary hopes, both which, are equally fitted to turn away men from their proper duties.
\par 
\par In truth, what advantages can society derive from those virtues styled by Christians, }{\i\f0 Evangelical?}{\f0  which they prefer to the social virtues, the real and
 the useful, and without which, they assert, a man cannot please God, Let us examine these vaunted perfections, and let us see of what utility they can be to }{\i\f0 society,}{\f0 
 and whether they really merit the preference which is given them by their advocates.
\par 
\par The first of these Christian virtues, which serves as a base for all the others, is }{\i\f0 faith.}{\f0  It consists in believing the truth of dogmas, of absurd fables, which Christianity (according to the catechisms) orders its disciples to believe
\emdash dogmas, as absurd and }{\i\f0 impossible}{\f0  as a }{\i\f0 square circle,}{\f0  or a }{\i\f0 round triangle\emdash  }{\f0 
from which we see, that this virtue exacts an entire renunciation of common sense; an assent to incredible facts, and a blind credulity in absurd dogmas, which, yet, every Christian is required to believe, under pain of damnation.
\par 
\par This virtue, too, though necessary to all men, is, nevertheless, the }{\i\f0 gift}{\f0  of heaven ! the effect of }{\i\f0 special grace.}{\f0  It forbids doubt and examination; it }{\i\f0 \ldblquote }{\f0 
forbids a man the right to exercise his reason ; it deprives him of the liberty of thinking, and degrades him into a bearded baby.
\par 
\par This faith vanishes when a man reasons; this virtue cannot sustain a tranquil scrutiny. And this is the reason why all }{\i\f0 thorough going}{\f0  Christians are naturally, and, consequently, the enemies of science. This miraculous faith, which 
\ldblquote believeth all things,\rdblquote  is not given to persons enlightened by science and reflection, and accustomed to think. It is not given but to those who are }{\i\f0 afraid to think,}{\f0  lest they should offend God.
\par 
\par The next Christian virtue which flows from the first, is }{\i\f0 hope,}{\f0  founded upon the promises which the New Testament makes to those who render themselves miserable in this life. It nourishes their enthusiasm, it makes them \ldblquote 
forget the things that are on earth, and reach forward unto the things\rdblquote 
 which are in another world. It renders them useless here below, and makes them firmly believe that God will recompense in heaven, the pains they have taken to make themselves miserable on earth. How can a man, occupied with such expectations of 
heavenly happiness, concern himself at all }{\i\f0 with,}{\f0  or }{\i\f0 for,}{\f0  the actual and present happiness of those around him, while he is }{\i\f0 indifferent  as to his own?}{\f0  And how can }{\i\f0 he help this,}{\f0  when he believes that 
\ldblquote friendship with the world is }{\i\f0 enmity with God?\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 The third virtue is }{\i\f0 charity.}{\f0  We have elsewhere said, that if universal love or charity means only }{\i\f0 general benevolence,}{\f0 
 and a desire to makes others happy, and to do them good, all this is commanded by reason and the ancient revelation; but if by this precept it is commanded to }{\i\f0 love}{\f0  those who }{\i\f0 hate, oppress}{\f0  or }{\i\f0 insult}{\f0 
 us, we do not at all scruple to assert, that the thing }{\i\f0 is impossible,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 unnatural.}{\f0  For, though we can }{\i\f0 abstain}{\f0  from }{\i\f0 hurting}{\f0  our enemy; or even }{\i\f0 can do him good,}{\f0  we cannot }{\i\f0 
really}{\f0  love him. }{\i\f0 Love}{\f0  is a movement of the heart, which is governed and directed by the laws of our nature, to those whom we think worthy of it, and to those }{\i\f0 only.
\par 
\par }{\f0 Charity, considered as general benevolence of disposition, is virtuous and necessary.  It is nothing more than a feeling which interests us in favour of our fellow beings. But how is this feeling consistent with the }{\i\f0 peculiar}{\f0 
 doctrines of the gospel ? According to its maxims, it is a crime to offer God a heart, whoso affections are shared by terrestrial objects. And besides, does not }{\i\f0 experience}{\f0   show, that devotees obliged by principle }{\i\f0 
to hate themselves,}{\f0  are little disposed }{\i\f0 to give better treatment to others ?
\par 
\par }{\f0 We should not be surprised that maxims, originating with enthusiasm, should aim at, and have the effect of,
 driving man out of himself. In the delirium of its enthusiasm, this religion forbids a man to love himself. It commands him to hate all pleasures but those of religion, and to cherish a long face. It attributes to him as meritorious, all the voluntary ev
i
ls he inflicts upon himself. From thence originate those austerites, those penances, destructive to health; those cruel privations by which the inhabitants of the monastic cell kill themselves by inches, in order to merit the joys of heaven. Now, how can 
good sense admit that God delights in seeing his creatures torment themselves ?
\par 
\par It may be said to all this, perhaps, that this is mere declamation, for Christians now a days do not torment themselves, but live as comfortable as others. To this I answer that Christianity is to be judged not by what Christians }{\i\f0 do,}{\f0 
 but by what it }{\i\f0 commands}{\f0  them to do. Now, I presume it will not be denied that the New Testament commands its professors to }{\i\f0 renounce }{\f0 the world, to be }{\i\f0 dead}{\f0  to the world, to }{\i\f0 \ldblquote crucify}{\f0 
 the flesh with its passions, and desires.\rdblquote 
 Certainly these directions were literally complied with by the primitive Christians; and, in doing so, they acted consistently. In those times, the deserts, the mountains, the forests were peopled with }{\i\f0 perfect }{\f0 Christians; who withd
rew from the world, deprived their families of support, and their country of citizens, in order to lead unmolested \ldblquote  the divine life.\rdblquote 
 It was the New Testament morality that spawned those legions of monks and cenobites, who thought to secure the favour of heaven, by burying their talents in the deserts, and devoting themselves to inaction and celibacy.
\par 
\par And at this very day we see these very same things in those Christian countries, which are }{\i\f0 truly faithful}{\f0  to the principles of their religion.
\par 
\par In fine, Christianity seems from the first, to have taken pains to set itself in }{\i\f0 point blanc opposition}{\f0 
 to nature, and reason. If it admits and includes some virtues ordered and appointed by God, good sense, and universal experience; it drives them beyond their bounds
 into extravagance. It preserves no just medium, which is the point of perfection. Voluptuousness, adultery and debauchery are forbidden by the laws of God and reason. But Christianity not content with commanding, and encouraging  marriage, as did the Old
 Testament, must forsooth go beyond it, and therefore encourages  }{\i\f0 celibacy, as}{\f0  the state of }{\i\f0 perfection}{\f0   God says, in Genesis, \ldblquote  it is not good that man should be alone. I will make a companion for him.\rdblquote 
 And he blessed all his creatures, saying, \ldblquote  increase and multiply.\rdblquote  But the gospel annuls this law, and represents a single life to be }{\i\f0 most pleasing,}{\f0  to the very being, whose }{\i\f0 very first}{\f0  command was, 
\ldblquote increase and multiply\rdblquote ! It advises a man to die without posterity, to refuse citizens to the state, and to himself, a support for his old age.
\par 
\par \ldblquote  It is to no purpose to }{\i\f0 deny}{\f0  that Christianity recommends all this; I say, }{\i\f0 it substantially does!}{\f0  and I boldly appeal,\emdash  not to a few Protestant Divines, \emdash  but to the }{\i\f0 New Testament;}{\f0  to the 
}{\i\f0 Homilies}{\f0  of the }{\i\f0 Fathers of the Church;}{\f0  to }{\i\f0 the History, }{\f0  and }{\i\f0 Practice}{\f0  of the }{\i\f0 Primitive Christians;}{\f0  to the innumerable }{\i\f0 Monasteries}{\f0 
 of Europe, and Asia; to the immense multitudes who have lived, and died }{\i\f0 hermits;}{\f0  and, finally, (because I know very well, the Protestant divines attribute these follies to the influence of }{\i\f0 Platonism, Pythagoranism, }{\f0 
and several other }{\i\f0 isms}{\f0  upon }{\i\f0 pure}{\f0  Christianity) I appeal to living evidence now in the world, to the only }{\i\f0 thoroughgoing}{\f0  Christians in it, viz., to the Society of }{\i\f0 the Shakers,}{\f0  who I maintain, and can  
}{\i\f0 prove,}{\f0 
 to be true, genuine imitators of the Primitive Christians, and a perfect exemplification of their manners, and modes of thinking. I adduce them the more confidently, because, being simple, and unlearned, their character has been formed by the spirit o
f the New Testament, and perfectly represents the }{\i\f0 effects}{\f0  of its principles }{\i\f0 fully carried out,}{\f0 
 and acted upon. They never heard of Platonism, or of Pythagoras in their lives, and, consequently, the polemic tricks, and evasions, which have been, as hinted j
ust now, resorted to by Protestant divines, to shift from the shoulders of Christianity to those of Plato or Pythagoras, the obnoxious principles we have been considering, are of no use in this case, as, whatever the characters of these Shakers may be, th
ey were formed by the New Testament, and by nothing else; and I believe, that every scholar in ecclesiastical history, who reads Brown\rquote 
s history of the Shakers, will be immediately and powerfully struck with the resemblance subsisting between them, and the Christians of the two first centuries.
\par 
\par As examples of the effects of those precepts of Christian morality, which command us to hate father, and mother, and sister, and brother, for the Bake of Jesus, take the following extracts from the history referred to.
\par 
\par \ldblquote According to their faith, natural affection must be }{\i\f0 eradicated;}{\f0 
 and they say they must love all equally alike, as brothers, and sisters in the gospel. It would exceed the limits of this work to give a particular account of the various schemes that hav
e been contrived, to destroy all natural affection and social attachment between man and wife, parent and child, brothers and sisters; especially towards such as have left the society. Two instances that occurred about this time, as specimens of others, m
ay suffice. A mother, who had renounced the faith, (i. e. left the society,) come to Niskeuna to see, }{\i\f0 her daughter.}{\f0  Eldress Hannah Matterson told the daughter to go into the room to her }{\i\f0 carnal}{\f0  mother, and say, \lquote 
 What do you come }{\i\f0 here }{\f0 for? I don\rquote t want you to come and see me with your }{\i\f0 carnal affections!\rquote  }{\f0 \lquote The mother being grieved, replied, \lquote 
I did not expect that a daughter of mine would ever address me in that manner.\rquote 
\par 
\par \lquote The daughter, in obedience to what she was taught, replied again, \lquote You have come here with your }{\i\f0 carnal fleshly desires, and I do\rquote nt want to see you,\rquote }{\f0  and left her mother.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  Some time after, one Duncan Shapley, who had belonged to the society, called to see Abigail, his sister, at Niskeuna, whom he had not seen for six or seven ye
ars; but he was not admitted: he waited some time, being loath to go away without seeing her. At last she was ordered to go to the window and address him }{\i\f0 in the language of abuse and scurrility.}{\f0  The words she made use of, it would be }{
\i\f0 indecent to mention.}{\f0  For this she was }{\i\f0 applauded,}{\f0  and that in the author\rquote s hearing, when he belonged to the society.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par This man gives a very curious account how the elders treated \ldblquote  their babes,\rdblquote 
 in their spiritual nursery; but I shall notice only one or two examples, which illustrate what I have advanced concerning the natural hostility of the spirit of the New Testament towards }{\i\f0 science. \ldblquote  I}{\f0 
 know of several, who, soon after they joined the Church, }{\i\f0 have been counselled by the Elders to dispose of their books ;}{\f0  and have accordingly done it. Elder Ebenezer being at my house one day, on seeing a number of books, he said\emdash  
\lquote Ah! Thomas must put away his books if he intends to become a }{\i\f0 good believer.\rquote 
\par 
\par As}{\f0  an instance of its effects upon the human understanding, take the following:\emdash   \ldblquote A short time after, being at a believer\rquote s house, at eleven o\rquote 
clock at night, they all having retired to rest, and I laying awake in a dry well finished room, in which was }{\i\f0 a stove}{\f0 
 and fire, there fell a large drop of water on my temples; on examination, I could not discover where the water came from. I told the believers of it in the morning.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  One said, \lquote  Ah ! it is a warning to you respecting your unbelief.\rquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  I then assigned some inconclusive reason, how the drop might have become formed in the room, and its falling.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par \ldblquote  One replied, \lquote Ah! that is the way you render a }{\i\f0 natural reason}{\f0  for the cause of every thing, and so }{\i\f0 reason away your faith}{\f0  and yourself out of the gospel.\rquote \rdblquote 
\par 
\par As another proof, that }{\i\f0 genuine}{\f0  Christianity discourages marriage, and considers celibacy as the only state of perfection, the Shakers }{\i\f0 allow of}{\f0  no }{\i\f0 marriages at all.
\par 
\par }{\f0 Thus you see that, among these people, to become a  \ldblquote good believer,\rdblquote  you must insult your parents, revile your brother, depise learning, and never render a \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 natural reason\rdblquote }{\f0 
 for any thing, lest you should }{\i\f0 \ldblquote reason away your faith, }{\f0 and }{\i\f0 yourself out of the gospel.\rdblquote }{\f0  
\par 
\par CHAPTER XVIII.
\par 
\par ON THE PECULIAR MORALITY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT, AS IT AFFECTS NATIONS AND POLITICAL SOCIETIES.
\par 
\par After having seen the uselessness, and even the danger, to individuals, of the perfections, the virtues, and the duties, which Christianity }{\i\f0 peculiarly }{\f0 commands; let us now see whether it has a more happy influence upon }{\i\f0 politics;}{
\f0  or whether it produces real happiness among the nations with whom this religion is established, and the spirit of it faithfully observed. Let us do so, and we shall find, that wherever Christianity }{\i\f0 is}{\f0  established and }{\i\f0 obeyed,}{
\f0  it establishes a set of laws directly opposed to those of a well ordered national society; and it soon makes this disagreement and incompatibility distinctly to be felt.
\par 
\par Politics are intended to maintain union and concord among the citizens. Christianity, though it preaches univers
al love, and commands its followers to live in peace; yet, by a strange inconsistency, consequentially annihilates the effect of these excellent precepts, by the }{\i\f0 inevitable}{\f0  divisions it causes among its followers, who }{\i\f0 necessarily}{
\f0  understand differently the Old and New Testaments, }{\i\f0 because}{\f0  the }{\i\f0 latter}{\f0  is not only irreconcilably contradictory to the }{\i\f0 former,}{\f0  but it is even inconsistent with }{\i\f0 itself.}{\f0  From the }{\i\f0 
very commencement }{\f0 of Christianity, we perceive very violent disputes among its founders and teachers; and 
through every succeeding century, we find, in the history of the Church, nothing but schism and heresy. These are followed by persecutions and quarrels, exceedingly well adapted to destroy this vaunted spirit of concord, said by its defenders to be peculi
ar to Christianity ; and the }{\i\f0 existence}{\f0  of which is, in fact, }{\i\f0 impossible}{\f0 
 in a religion which is one entire chaos of obscure doctrines and impracticable precepts. In every religious dispute, both parties thought that God was on their side, and, consequently, 
they were obstinate and irreconcilable.  And how should it have been otherwise, since they confounded the cause of God with the miserable interests of their own vanity ? Thus, being little disposed to give way on one part or the other, they cut one anothe
r\rquote s throats; they tormented, they burnt each other: they tore one another to pieces; and having exterminated or put down the obnoxious sects, they sung }{\i\f0 Te Deum.
\par 
\par }{\f0 It is not my intention to pursue, in this place, the horrid detail of ecclesiastical history, a
s connected with that of the Roman empire. Mr. Gibbon has exhibited in such colours this dreadful record of follies, and of crimes, that it is difficult to see how the maxim of judging the tree by its fruit, will not fatally affect the cause of the Christ
ian religion. I refer to Mr. Gibbon\rquote s history as a }{\i\f0 cool}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 impartial}{\f0 
 narrative; for I am well satisfied that, so far from having reason to complain of him, the advocates of Christianity have very great reason, indeed, to thank him for his }{\i\f0 forbearance, }{\f0 sinc
e, with his eloquence, he might have drawn a picture that would have made humanity shudder. For, throughout the whole history, if a man had wished to know what was then the orthodox faith, the best method of ascertaining it, would have been, undoubtedly, 
to ask, \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 What is the catechism of this public executioner.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 The Christian religion was, it is evident from his history, the principal, though by no means the only cause of the decline and fall of the Roman empire. Because it }{\i\f0 degraded}{\f0  the spirit of the peo
ple, and because it produced monks and hermits in abundance, but yielded no soldiers. The heathen adversaries of Christianity were in the right when they said, that \ldblquote if it prevailed, Rome was no more!\rdblquote 
 The Christians would not serve in the armies of the em
peror, if they could possibly avoid it. They justly considered the profession of a soldier, and that of a Christian, as incompatible. Celsus accuses them of abandoning the empire, under whose laws they lived, to its enemies.  And what is the answer of Ori
gen to this accusation? Look: at his pitiful reply! He endeavours to palliate this undutiful refusal by representing that\emdash  \ldblquote the Christians had their }{\i\f0 peculiar}{\f0  camps, in which they incessantly }{\i\f0 combatted}{\f0 
 for the safety of the emperor and empire, by lifting up their right hands\emdash IN PRAYER!!\rdblquote 
 (See Origen contra Celsum, Lib. 8, p. 437.) This is a sneaking piece of business truly! But Origen could have given another answer, if he had dared to avow it, which is, that his co-religionists, in his time, had not ceased t
o expect their master momentarily to appear; and, of course, it little mattered what became of the emperor, or the empire. This notion was the principal engine for making proselytes ; and it was by this expectation that many were frightened into baptism.

\par 
\par That Christianity was considered incompatible with the military profession, is evident from many passages of the fathers. And one of them, I believe, Tertullian, ventures to insinuate to the Christians in the legions, the expediency }{\i\f0 of deserting,}
{\f0  to rid themselves of \ldblquote their carnal employment.\rdblquote 
 Nay, to such a height did this spirit prevail, that it never stopped till it taught the Roman youth in Italy the expedient of cutting off the thumbs of their right hands in order to avoid the conscription, and that th
ey might be allowed to count their beads at home in quiet.
\par 
\par If we examine, in detail, the precepts of this religion, }{\i\f0 as}{\f0  they }{\i\f0 affect nations,}{\f0  we shall see, that it interdicts every thing which can make a nation flourishing. We have seen already 
the notion of imperfection which Christianity attaches to marriage, and the esteem and preference it holds out to celibacy. These ideas certainly do not favour population, which is, without contradiction, the first source of power to every state.
\par 
\par Commerce
 is not less obnoxious to the principles of a religion whose founder is represented as denouncing an anathema against the rich, and as excluding them from the kingdom of heaven. All industry is equally interdicted to perfect Christians, who are to spend t
heir lives \ldblquote  as strangers, and pilgrims upon earth,\rdblquote  and who are \ldblquote  not to take care of the morrow.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Chrysostom says, that \ldblquote  a }{\i\f0 merchant}{\f0  cannot please God, and that such a one ought to be }{\i\f0 chased out of the church.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 No Christian, also, without being inconsis
tent, can serve in the army. For a man, who is never sure of being in a state of grace, is the most extravagant of men, if, by the hazard of battle, he exposes himself to eternal perdition. And a Christian who ought to }{\i\f0 love his}{\f0 
 enemies, is he not guilty of
 the greatest of crimes, when he inflicts death upon a hostile soldier, of whose disposition he knows nothing: and whom he may, at a single stroke, precipitate into hell? A Christian soldier is a monster! a non-descript! and Lactantius affirms, that 
\ldblquote  a Christian cannot be either a }{\i\f0 soldier,}{\f0  or an accuser to a criminal cause.\rdblquote  And, at this day, the Quakers, and Mennonites refuse to carry arms, and, in so doing, they are }{\i\f0 consistent}{\f0  Christians.
\par 
\par Christianity declares war against the }{\i\f0 sciences;}{\f0  they are regarded  as an obstacle to salvation. \ldblquote Science puffeth up.\rdblquote 
 says Paul. And the fathers of the church, St. Gregory, St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine denounce vehemently }{\i\f0 astronomy,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 geometry.}{\f0  And Jerome declares, that he was whipped by an angel only for reading that Pagan }{\i\f0 
Cicero.
\par 
\par }{\f0 It has been often remarked, that the most enlightened men are commonly bad Christians. For independent of }{\i\f0 its}{\f0  effects on }{\i\f0 faith,}{\f0  which science is exceedingly apt to s
ubvert, it diverts the Christian from the work of his salvation, which is the only thing needful. In a word, the }{\i\f0 peculiar}{\f0  principles of Christianity }{\i\f0 literally obeyed,}{\f0 
 would entirely subvert from its foundations every political society now existing. If this assertion is doubted, let }{\i\f0 the }{\f0 
doubter read the works of the early Fathers, and he will see that their morality is totally incompatible with the preservation and prosperity of a state. He will see according to Lactantius, and others, that \ldblquote no Christian can
 lawfully be a soldier.\rdblquote  That according to Justin, \ldblquote no Christian can be a magistrate.\rdblquote  That according to Chrysostom, \ldblquote no Christian ought to be a merchant\rdblquote  And that according to several, \ldblquote 
 no Christian ought t }{\i\f0 study.\rdblquote  }{\f0 In fine, joining these maxims together with those of the New Testament, it will follow, that a Christian, who as he is commanded, }{\i\f0 aims at perfection, }{\f0 
is a useless member of the community, useless to his family, and to all around him. He is an idle dreamer, who thinks of nothing but futurity; who has nothing in common with the interests of the world, and according to Tertullian \ldblquote 
has no other business but to }{\i\f0 get out of it as quietly as possible.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 Let us hearken to Esebius of Caesarea, and we shall abundantly discover the truth of what has been said.
\par 
\par \ldblquote The manner of life, (says he,) of the Christian church, surpasses our present nature, and the common life of men. It seeks neither }{\i\f0 marriage,}{\f0  nor }{\i\f0 children,}{\f0  nor }{\i\f0 riches.}{\f0  In fine, it is entirely }{\i\f0 
a stranger to human modes of living. It is entirely absorbed}{\f0 
 in an insatiable love of heavenly things. Those who follow this course of life, have only their bodies upon earth, their whole souls are in heaven, and they already dwell among pure and celestial intelligences, and they }{\i\f0 
despise the manner of life of other men\rdblquote }{\f0  Demonstrat. Evang. vol. ii. p.29.
\par 
\par Indeed a man firmly persuaded of the truth of; Christianity cannot attach himself to any thing here below. Every thing here is \ldblquote an occasion of stumbling, a rock of offence.\rdblquote  Every thing here, diverts him from think
ing of his salvation. If Christians in general, happily, for society, were not }{\i\f0 inconsistent,}{\f0  and did not }{\i\f0 neglect}{\f0  the }{\i\f0 peculiar}{\f0  precepts of their religion, no large society of them }{\i\f0 could exist;}{\f0 
 and the nations enlightened by the gospel would turn hermits, and nuns. All business, but fasting and prayer, would be at an end. There would be nothing but groaning in \ldblquote  this vale\rdblquote  of tears;\rdblquote 
 and they would make themselves, and others, as miserable }{\i\f0 as possible,}{\f0  from }{\i\f0 the best of motives,}{\f0  viz; the desire to fulfill what they mistakenly conceived to be the will of God.
\par 
\par Is this a picture taken from the life, or is it a fanciful representation of something different from the }{\i\f0 peculiar}{\f0  morality of the New Testament ? This serious question demands a serious answer. If it be s
uch as it is represented above and such it really appears to me, and such I have unfortunately }{\i\f0 experienced }{\f0  its operation to be on my own mind\emdash  I would respectfully ask}{\i\f0 \emdash  }{\f0 can such a religion, whose }{\i\f0 peculiar
}{\f0  principles tend to render men hateful, and hating one another: which has often rendered sovereigns, persecutors, and subjects, either rebels, or slaves: a religion, whose }{\i\f0 peculiar}{\f0 
 moral principles and maxims, teach the mind to grovel, and humble, and break down the energies of man; and which divert him fr
om thinking of his true interests, and the true happiness of himself and his fellow men. Can such a religion, I would respectfully ask, be from God, since where fully obeyed, it would prove utterly destructive to society?
\par 
\par CHAPTER XIX.
\par 
\par A CONSIDERATION OF SOME SUPPOSED ADVANTAGES ATTRIBUTED TO THE NEW, OVER THE OLD, TESTAMENT ; AND WHETHER THE DOCTRINE OF A RESURRECTION, AND A LIFE TO COME, IS NOT TAUGHT IN THE OLD TESTAMENT; IN CONTRADICTION TO THE ASSERTION, THAT \ldblquote 
 LIFE AND IMMORTALITY WERE BROUGHT TO LIGHT BY THE GOSPEL.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par From the preceding chapters, you may judge, reader, of the justice and truth of the opinion, that \ldblquote the yoke of Christian morality is easy, and its \ldblquote burthen light;\rdblquote 
 and also of the veracity and fairness of that constant assertion of divines, \ldblquote that Jesus came to remove the heavy yoke of the Mosaic Law, and to substitute in its room one of easier observance.\rdblquote \emdash 
 Whether this, their assertion, be not rash, and ill founded, I will cheerfully leave to be decided by any cool and thinking man, who knows human nature, and is acquainted with the human heart. I say, I would cheerfully leave it to such a man, \ldblquote 
whether the Mosaic Law, with all its numerous rites, and ceremonial observances, nay, with all \ldblquote the (ridiculous) traditions of the Elders,\rdblquote  supe
radded, would not be much more bearable to human nature, and much easier to be observed and obeyed, than such precepts as these, \ldblquote Sell all thou hast, and give it to the poor.\rdblquote  \ldblquote  If a man ask thy cloak, give him thy coat also.
\rdblquote  \ldblquote Resist not the injurious person, but if a man smite thee on one cheek, turn to him the other also.\rdblquote  \ldblquote Extirpate and destroy all carnal affection, and love nothing, but religion.\rdblquote   \ldblquote 
 Take no thought for to-morrow;\rdblquote \emdash  I am confident that the decision would be given in my favour; and have no doubt, that with thinking men, the contrary opinion would be instantly rejected with the contempt it merits.
\par 
\par Whether the Mosaic Code be the best possible, or really divine, is of no consequence in this inquiry, and is with me another question from that of its }{\i\f0 inferiority}{\f0 
 to that of the New Testament. I do by no means assert the former; but have no hesitation to give my opinion, after a pretty thorough examination of the subject, that the reflections of Paul, and those usually thrown out against the Mos
aic Code by Theologians, when comparing it with that of the New Testament, in order to }{\i\f0 deprecate}{\f0 
 the former, appear to me extremely partial and unjust; and so far from true, that I think, that the ancient law has the advantage over the precepts of the New Testament, in being, at least, practicable and consistent.}{\cs16\f0\super *{\footnote 
\pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super *}{ }{\f0\fs20 
The author had prepared, in order to subjoin in this place, an examination of the Mosaic Code, and a development of its principles, which he thinks would have satisfied the reader of the truth of
 what he has said in the last paragraph. But as it would have too much increased the bulk of the volume, it has been omitted. It is an institution however curious enough to be the subject of an interesting discussion, which he should be happy to see from 
the hands of one able to do it justice.\emdash E.
\par }}}{\f0 
\par 
\par Another unfounded reproach which Theologians, in order to magnify the importance of the New Testament, cast upon the Old, is this: They say, that the Old Tes
tament represents God only as the tutelary Deity of the Israelites, and as not so much concerned for the rest of mankind. To show that this is a very mistaken notion, and to manifest that the Eternal of the Old Testament is represented therein, not as the
 God of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles, I refer to these words :\emdash  \ldblquote The Lord thy God is God }{\i\f0 of }{\f0 
gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible ; who regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward.  He doth execute the judgment of the fatherless, and widow, and }{\i\f0 loveth the stranger,}{\f0 
 in giving him food and raiment. Love ye, therefore, the stranger. Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him, for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.  Hear the cau
ses between your brethren, and judge righteously between a man and his brother, }{\i\f0 and the stranger}{\f0  that is with him. One law shall be to him that is home born, }{\i\f0 and to the stranger}{\f0 
 that sojourneth among you. The stranger that dwelleth with you shall be as one born among you, and thou }{\i\f0 shalt love him as thyself.}{\f0  I am the Lord your God.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Indeed, so little truth is there in the notion, that the law and religion of the Old Testament were established with the intention of confining them to one people, }{\i\f0 exclusive}{\f0  of all others, that the Old Testament certainly }{\i\f0 represents 
}{\f0 them in such manner, as shows, that they were }{\i\f0 intended}{\f0  to be as unconfined as the Christian, or Mahometan; its religion, in fact, admitted every one who would receive it. And what is more, it can be p
roved that the Old Testament dispensation }{\i\f0 claims,}{\f0 
 as appears from itself, to have been given for the common advantage of all mankind. And it is asserted in it, (whether truly or not, is not the question; it is sufficient for my purpose, that it }{\i\f0 asserts it),}{\f0 
 that the religion contained in it, will one day be the religion of all mankind. For it declares that Jerusalem will be the centre of worship for all nations, and the temple there, be \ldblquote the house of prayer for all nations;\rdblquote 
 that the Eternal will be the only God worshipped; and his laws the only laws obeyed. It represents Abraham and his posterity as merely the instruments of the Eternal to bring about these ends; it is repeatedly declared therein, that the reason of God
\rquote s dispensations towards them was, \ldblquote that all the earth }{\i\f0 might know}{\f0  that the Eternal is God, and that there is no other but }{\i\f0 Him.\rdblquote }{\f0 
 According to its history, .when God threatened to destroy the Israelites for their perverseness in the wilderness, and offers Moses, interceding for them, to raise, up }{\i\f0 his}{\f0 
 seed to fulfil the purposes for which he designed the posterity of Abraham; he tells Moses that his purpose should }{\i\f0 not}{\f0  be frustrated through the perverseness of the chosen instruments; \ldblquote  but, (saith He), as surely as I live, }{
\i\f0 all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord,\rdblquote  }{\f0 Numbers xiv. 21. Many passages of similar import are contained in the Psalms, and the Prophets. In fact, there is no truth at all in the statement }{\i\f0 of}{\f0 
 the Catechisms, that the Old Testament was }{\i\f0 merely}{\f0  preparatory, and }{\i\f0 intended}{\f0  merely }{\i\f0 to prepare}{\f0  the way for \ldblquote  a better covenant,\rdblquote 
 as Paul says; even for another religion, (the Christian) which was to convert all nations; for, (if the Old Testament be suffered to tell its own story,) we shall find, that it claims, and challenges 
the honour of beginning, and completing, this magnificent design }{\i\f0 solely to itself.  I}{\f0  was going to overwhelm the patience of the reader with quotations from it, to this purpose; but being willing to spare him and myself, I will only produce 
}{\i\f0 one,}{\f0  which, as it is direct and peremptory to this effect, is as good as a hundred, to demonstrate that the Old Testament at least }{\i\f0 claims}{\f0  what I have said. Zech. viii. 20, \ldblquote 
 Thus saith the Eternal of Hosts: It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities; and the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying: \ldblquote 
Let us go speedily to pray before the Eternal, and to seek the Eternal of Hosts: I will go also. Yea, many people, and strong nations shall come to seek the Eternal of Hosts in }{\i\f0 Jerusalem,}{\f0 
 and to pray before the Eternal. Thus saith the Eternal of Hosts : In those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all the languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, sayi
ng, we will go with you.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par Be it so, it may be said;\emdash  \ldblquote Still, it is to Christianity the world owes the consoling doctrine of a life to come. Life and immortality were brought to light by the Gospel,\rdblquote 
 say the Christian divines; and they assert, that the doctrine of a resurrection was not known to Jew or Gentile, till they learned it from Jesus\rquote  followers. The Old Testament, (say they,) taught the Jews nothing of the glorious truths concerning 
\ldblquote the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting,\rdblquote  their \ldblquote  beggarly elements\rdblquote  confined their views to temporal happiness, only.\rdblquote 
  These assertions I shall prove from the Old Testament itself, to be contrary to fact; for the Jews both }{\i\f0 knew,}{\f0  and were taught by their Bibles to }{\i\f0 expect}{\f0  a resurrection, and believed it as firmly as any Christian }{\i\f0 can,}{
\f0  or }{\i\f0 ever did.}{\f0  For proof hereof, I shall, in the first place, quote the 37th chapter of Ezekiel, and which is as follows, \ldblquote  The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the 
midst of the valley, which was full of bones. And caused me to pass by them round about, and behold there were very many in the open valley, and behold they were dry.\emdash 
 And he said unto me. Son of man, can these bones live? and I answered, O Lord God, thou 
knowest. Again he said unto me. Prophecy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord. Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones, behold I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live, and I will lay sinews upon 
y
ou, and will bring up flesh upon you; and cover you with skin, and put breath into you; and ye shall live, and know that I am the Lord. So I prophesied as I was commanded, and, as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold, a shaking, and the bones came 
together, bone to his bone. And \ldblquote 
when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered them above ; but there was no breath in them. Then said he unto me. Prophecy son of man, and say unto the wind, thus saith the Lord God, com
e from the four winds, O breath! and breathe upon these slain, that they may live. So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up again upon their feet, an exceeding great army.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par A plainer resurrection than this is, I think never was preached either by Jesus or his followers. Again, Daniel the prophet says, \ldblquote 
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt,\rdblquote  Daniel xii. 2. Now Ezekiel lived almost }{\i\f0 six hundred years}{\f0 
 before Jesus, and Daniel was contemporary with the former; and is it not a little surprising, that the Jews should learn, for the }{\i\f0 first time,}{\f0  the doctrine of a resurrection of the followers of Jesus Christ, when they 
knew of the resurrection almost six hundred years before he was born ? Isaiah also, (who lived before either Ezekiel or Daniel), in the 26th chapter of his prophesies, (exciting the Jews to have confidence in God, and not to despair on account of their ca
ptivity, and the troubles and afflictions which they should suffer therein), foretells to them that death would not deprive them of the reward of their piety and virtue; for God would raise them from the dead, and make them happy. \ldblquote 
Thy dead men shall live, my dead bodies}{\cs16\f0\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super #}{ }{\f0\fs20 Mr. English, it will be perceived, differs in his translation of the Hebrew word }{\i\f0\fs20 \lquote nebelati,
\rquote }{\f0\fs20  which is, certainly, in the singular number, and not plural. The correct rendering is, doubtless, }{\i\f0\fs20 \ldblquote with}{\f0\fs20  my dead }{\i\f0\fs20 body}{\f0\fs20  they,\rdblquote  &c.; but this weakens 
not at all his argument, which is essentially a Jewish one. See the Commentators, Chizoook Emunah, &c. &c.\emdash D.
\par }}}{\f0  (i. e., the bodies of God\rquote s servants) they shall arise. Awake! and sing ! ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs,\rdblquote  The me
aning of the last clause is -- that, as the grass, which in Oriental countries becomes brown and shrivelled by the heat of the sun ; from the effects of the dew it changes and springs up, as it were, in a moment, green and fresh and beautiful; so, by the 
i
nstantaneous influence of the word of God, the dry and decayed remains of mortality shall become blooming with immortal freshness and beauty. See also Hosea xiii. 14. I might easily multiply passages from the Old Testament, to prove that the doctrine of a
 resurrection was familiar to the ancient Israelites, but I suppose that what I have already produced, is sufficient. Those, however, who wish to see the subject more thoroughly examined, are referred to \ldblquote  Greave\rquote 
s Lectures on the Pentateuch,\rdblquote  a work lately published in Europe, highly honourable to the author. See also a Tract upon this subject, published by Dr. Priestley, in 1801.
\par 
\par I shall only add one observation more on this subject, viz,, that it is very}{\i\f0  }{\f0 singular that Christian divines should assert, that \ldblquote  life and immortality were }{\i\f0 first brought to light}{\f0  by the Gospel,\rdblquote  when the }{
\i\f0 New Testament itself}{\f0  represents the resurrection of the dead as being  }{\i\f0 perfectly  well known}{\f0  to the Jews, and describes }{\i\f0 Jesus himself}{\f0  as proving it to }{\i\f0 the Sadducees out of the}{\f0  Old }{\i\f0 Testament!!!

\par 
\par }{\f0 
\par CONCLUSION.
\par 
\par I have now finished my work, which I have written in order to exculpate myself, and to do justice to others ; and having re-examined  every link of the chain of my argument, I think it amply strong to support the conclusions a
ttached to it. Though there might have been drawn from the Old and New Testaments, many additional arguments corroborative of what has been said, yet, at present, I shall add no more; as I think that what has been brought forward has just claims to be con
sidered by the impartial as quite sufficient to prove these two points\emdash  that the New Testament can neither subsist }{\i\f0 with}{\f0  the Old Testament, nor }{\i\f0 without}{\f0  it; and that the New Testament system was built }{\i\f0 first}{\f0 
 upon a }{\i\f0 mistake,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 afterwards}{\f0  buttressed up with forged and apocryphal documents.
\par 
\par Let the candid now judge, whether the author, knowing these things, or, at least persuaded of their truth, could have persisted in affirming, (in a place where sincerity is expected), in the name of the Almighty, that the cl
aims of the New Testament were valid, without being a hypocrite, and an impostor.
\par 
\par Let them also consider, whether, after being unable to obtain a satisfactory refutation of the objections contained in this volume, his resigning a profession whose duties o
bliged him to say what he was convinced was false, was conduct to be reprehended. And lastly, he appeals to the good sense of the public, for a decision, whether, with such objections and difficulties weighing upon his mind, as he has now exposed, his con
duct in that respect can reasonably be attributed to the unmanly influence of caprice and fickle- ness, (as has been circulated by some who had an interest in making it believed;) or to the just influence of motives deserving a better name.
\par 
\par With regard to 
the unfortunate people whose arguments have been brought forward in this volume, we have, reader, now gone over, and distinctly felt, the whole ground of the controversy between them and their persecutors, mentioned in the Preface. And as they make use of
 the Old Testament as a foundation, }{\i\f0 admitted,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 necessarily}{\f0  admitted by Christians, }{\i\f0 to be of divine authority,}{\f0 
 and are surrounded by the bulwarks they have raised out of the demolished entrenchments of their adversaries, I do not see but that \ldblquote  their castle\rquote s strength may laugh a siege to scorn.\rdblquote 
 And after reviewing, and revolving, over and over in my own mind the arguments }{\i\f0 on both sides,}{\f0  I am obliged to believe, that the stoutest Polemical Goliath who may venture to attack it, especially their strong hold\emdash 
their arguments about the }{\i\f0 Messiahship,}{\f0  will find to his cost, that when his weak point is but }{\i\f0 known,}{\f0  the mightiest Achilles }{\i\f0 must fall}{\f0  before the feeblest Paris, whose arrow is\emdash }{\i\f0 aimed at his heel.

\par 
\par }{\f0 The author hopes, and thinks he has a right to expect, that whoever may attempt to answer his book, will do it fairly, like a man of candour; without trying to }{\i\f0 evade}{\f0  the main question\emdash  that of the }{\i\f0 Messiahship}{\f0  of }{
\i\f0 Jesus. }{\f0 He fears, that he shall see an answer precisely resembling the many others he has seen upon that subject. Except two\emdash 
 those of Sukes, and Jeffries. (who acknowledge that miracles have nothing to do with the question of the Messiahship, which can be decided by the Old Testament }{\i\f0 only}{\f0  ;)\emdash 
all that he has ever met with, evade this question, and slide over to the ground of }{\i\f0 miracles.}{\f0  Such conduct in an answerer of this book would be very }{\i\f0 unfair, }{\f0 and also very }{\i\f0 absurd.}{\f0 
 For the case is precisely resembling the following\emdash  A father informs by letter his son in a foreign country, that he is about to send him }{\i\f0 a Tutor,}{\f0  whom he will know by the following marks; \ldblquote 
 He is learned in the mathematics, and the physical sciences; acquainted with the learned languages, and an excellent physician; of a dark complexion; six feet high, and with a voice loud, and commanding.\rdblquote 
 By and by, a man comes to the young man, professing to be this tutor sent to him by his father. On examining the man, and comparing him with the description in his father\rquote 
s letter, he finds him totally unlike the person he had been taught to expect. Instead of being acquainted with the sciences, therein mentioned, he knows nothing about them; instead of being \ldblquote 
 six feet high, of a dark complexion, and with a voice loud and commanding,\rdblquote  he is a diminutive creature of five feet, of a light complexion, with a voice like a woman\rquote s.
\par 
\par The young man, with his father\rquote s letter in his hand, tells the pretended tutor, that he certainly cannot be the person he has been told to expect. The man persists, and appeals to certain \ldblquote  wonderful works\rdblquote 
 he performs in order to convince the young man, that he is acquainted with the sciences aforesaid, and that he is also six feet high; of a dark complexion; and talks like an Emperor! The young man replies. \ldblquote 
 Friend, you are either an enthusiast, a mad man, or something worse. As to your \lquote  signs and wonders,\rquote  I have been }{\i\f0 warned}{\f0  in my father\rquote s letter to pay no regard to }{\i\f0 any such things }{\f0 in }{\i\f0 this}{\f0 
 case. Besides, you ought to be sensible, that your }{\i\f0 identity}{\f0  with the person I am taught by my father\rquote s letter to expect, can be only determined by }{\i\f0 comparing}{\f0  you with the }{\i\f0 description}{\f0 
 of him given therein. Whether your \lquote wonderful works\rquote  are real miracles or not, I neither know, nor care. At }{\i\f0 any rate,}{\f0  they cannot, in the nature of things, be any thing to the purpose in; }{\i\f0 this case.}{\f0 
 For you to pretend, that they }{\i\f0 prove}{\f0  what you offer them to prove, }{\i\f0 is }{\f0 quite absurd; you might }{\i\f0 as well,}{\f0  and as }{\i\f0 reasonably,}{\f0  pretend, that they }{\i\f0 could }{\f0 prove Aristotle to have been Alexan
der; or the Methodist George Whitfield to be the Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte!\rdblquote 
\par 
\par To conclude, if any person should feel inclined to attempt to refute this book, let him do it like a man; without evading the question, or equivocating, or caviling about little
 things.  Let him consider the principal question, and the main arguments on which he perceives that the author relies, and not pass over these silently, and hold up a few petty mistakes and subsidiary arguments as specimens of the whole book. Such a mode
 of defence would be very disengenuous, and with a discerning reader, perfectly futile and insufficient.  It would be as if a man prostrate, and bleeding under a lion whose teeth and claws were infixed .in his throat, should tear a }{\i\f0 
handful of hairs}{\f0  out of the animal\rquote s mane, and hold them up as proofs of }{\i\f0 victory.
\par 
\par }{\f0 In fine, let him, before his undertaking, carefully consider these pungent words of Bishop Beveridge, \ldblquote  Opposite answers, and downright arguments advantage a cause; but when a disputant leaves many things }{\i\f0 untouched,}{\f0 
 as if they were }{\i\f0 too hot for his fingers;}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 declines}{\f0  the weight of other things, and }{\i\f0 alters the true state of the question:}{\f0  it is a shrewd sign, either that }{\i\f0 he}{\f0  has not weigh
ed things maturely, or else (which is more probable,) that he }{\i\f0 maintains a desperate cause.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\f0 FINIS.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par APPENDIX A.}{\cs16\f0\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \widctlpar\adjustright \f4\cgrid {\cs16\super #}{ }{\f0\fs20 This was, originally, a note; but, in order not to divert too much the reader\rquote 
s attention, it has been thought advisable to insert it here.\emdash D.
\par }}}{\f0 
\par 
\par As reasons for this assertion, (that \ldblquote  the account of the resurrection given by the evangelists is no better, nay, }{\i\f0 worse,}{\f0  than conjecture, as it is a mere forgery of the second century.\emdash 
Vide page 86) take the following facts, which are now ascertained, and can be proved:\emdash  1. Several sects of Christians in the first century, in the apostolic era, }{\i\f0 denied}{\f0 
 that Jesus was crucified, as the Basildeans, &c.   The author of the epistle ascribed }{\i\f0 to }{\f0 Barnabas, I think, }{\i\f0 denied it,}{\f0  and the author of the gospel of Thomas certainly did.  2. The Jewish Christians, the }{\i\f0 
disciples of the twelve apostles, never }{\f0 received, but }{\i\f0 rejected}{\f0  every individual book of the present New Testament. They held in especial abomination the writings }{\i\f0 of Paul,}{\f0  whom they called \ldblquote an apostate;
\rdblquote  and there is extant, in \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 Cotelerius\rquote  Patres Apostolici,\rdblquote }{\f0  a letter ascribed to Peter, written to James at Jerusalem wherein he complains bitterly of Paul, styling him \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 a lawless man,
\rdblquote }{\f0  and a crafty misrepresenter of him (Peter,) and his doctrine, in that Paul represented, every where, Peter as being }{\i\f0 secretly of}{\f0 
 the same opinions with himself; against this he enters his protest, and declares that he reprobates the doctrine of Paul. (See Appendix B.)  3. It is certain, that from the beginning, the Christians were never agreed }{\i\f0 as to points of faith;}{\f0 
 and that the apostles themselves, so far from being considered as }{\i\f0 inspired,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 infallible,}{\f0  were frequently contradicted, thwarted, and set at naught by their own converts: and there were as many sects, heresies, a
nd quarrels, in the }{\i\f0 first}{\f0 
 century, as in the second or third. 4. Jesus and his apostles were no sooner off the stage, than forgeries of all kinds broke in with irresistible force: Gospels, Epistles, Acts, Revelations without number, published in the names,
 and under the feigned authority, of Jesus and his apostles, abounded in the Christian church; and as some of these were as }{\i\f0 early in time}{\f0  as any of the writings in the present canon of the New Testament, so they were received }{\i\f0 
promiscuously with them,}{\f0 
 and held in equal credit and veneration, and read in the public assemblies as of equal authority with those now received. 5. The very learned and pious Dodwell, in his Dissertations on Iraeneus avows, that he cannot find in ecclesiastical antiquities, (w
hich he understood better than any man of his age,) any evidence at all, that the four Gospels were known or heard of, before the time of T}{\i\f0 rajan, and Adrian,}{\f0 
 i.e. before the middle of the second century, i. e. nearly a hundred years after the apostles }{\i\f0 were dead.}{\f0  (See Appendix C.) Long }{\i\f0 before this time, }{\f0 
we know that there were extant numbers of spurious gospels, forged, and ascribed to the apostles; and we have not the least evidence to be depended on, that those now received were not also apocryphal. For they were written nobody certainly knows by }{
\i\f0 whom,}{\f0  or }{\i\f0 where,}{\f0  or }{\i\f0 when.}{\f0  They first appeared in an age of credulity, when forgeries of this kind abounded and were received with avidity by those whose opinions they favoured, while they were rejected as spurious by
 many sects of Christians, who asserted that }{\i\f0 they were}{\f0  possessed of the genuine apostles, which, however, those who received  \ldblquote the four,\rdblquote 
 denied. 6. All the different sects of Christians, without a known exception, altered, interpolated, and without scrupl
e garbled, their different copies of their various and discordant gospels, in order to adapt them to their jarring and whimsical philosophical notions, Celsus accuses them of this, and they accuse each other. And that they were continually tampering with 
t
heir copies of the books of the New Testament, is evident from the immense number of various readings, and from some whole phrases, and even verses, which for knavish purposes were foisted into the text, but have been detected, and exposed by Griesbach, a
nd others. They also forged certain rhapsodies under the name of \ldblquote  }{\i\f0 Sybbiline Oracles,\rdblquote }{\f0 
 and then adduce them as prophetic proofs of the truth of their religion. They also interpolated certain clumsy forgeries as prophecies of Jesus into their copies of their Greek version of the Old Testament. 7. }{\i\f0 The present }{\f0 
canon of the New Testament has never been sanctioned by the general consent of Christians. The Syrian church rejects some of its books;\emdash some of its books were not admitted until after long opposition, and
 not until several hundred years after Jesus. The lists of what were considered as canonical books, dif}{\i\f0 fer}{\f0 
 in different ages, and some books now acknowledged by all Christians to be forgeries, were in the second and third centuries considered as equally ap
ostolic as those now received, and as such, were publicly read in the churches. 8. The reason why we have not now extant gospels, different and contradictory to those now received, is, because that the sect or party which finally got the better of its adv
ersaries, and styled itself Catholic, or orthodox, took care to burn and destroy the heretics, and their gospels with them. They likewise took care to hunt up and burn the books of the pagan adversaries of Christianity, \ldblquote 
because they were shockingly offensive to pious ears.\rdblquote   9. Semler considered the New Testament as a collection of pious frauds, written for pious purposes, in the latter part of the second century, (the very time assigned for their }{\i\f0 
first appearance}{\f0  by Dodwell.) Evanson adopts, and gives good
 reasons for a similar opinion with regard to most of the books which go to compose it. Lastly. The reason why the New Testament canon has been so long respected, seems to have been purely owing to the credulity of the ignorant, and the laziness, indiffer
ence, or }{\i\f0 fears }{\f0 of the learned.
\par 
\par Douglas, in his famous \ldblquote Criterion,\rdblquote  gives us, as infallible tests, by which we may distinguish when written accounts of miracles are fabulous, the following marks:\emdash 
\par 
\par 1. \ldblquote We have reason to suspect (he says) the accounts to }{\i\f0 be false,}{\f0  when they are not published to the world till }{\i\f0 after the time}{\f0  when they are said to have been performed.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par 2. \ldblquote  We have reason to suspect them to be }{\i\f0 false,}{\f0  when they are not published }{\i\f0 in the place}{\f0  where it is pretended the facts were wrought, but are propagated only at a great distance from the supposed scene of action.
\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\i\f0 3.}{\f0  \ldblquote Supposing the accounts }{\i\f0 to have}{\f0  the two fore-mentioned qualifications, we still have reason to suspect them to be false, if in the time }{\i\f0 when, }{\f0 and at the place }{\i\f0 where,}{\f0  they took the
ir rise, they might be suffered to pass without examination.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par These are the marks he gives us as infallible tests by which we may distinguish the accounts of miracles in the New Testament to be }{\i\f0 true;}{\f0  and accounts of miracles in other books (though supported by more }{\i\f0 testimony }{\f0 
than the former,) to be false; with how much justice, may be evident from the following observations:\emdash 
\par 
\par 1. If \ldblquote  we have reason to suspect the accounts to be false, when they are not published to the world till long after the time when they are said to have been performed,\rdblquote 
 then we have reasons to suspect the accounts given in the four gospels; for we have no proof in the world, that any of them were written till nearly one hundred years after the supposed writers of them were all dead.
\par 
\par 2. If \ldblquote  we have reason to suspect them to be false, when they are not published in the }{\i\f0 place}{\f0  where it is pretended the facts were wrought, but are propagated only at a great distance from the supposed scene of action,\rdblquote 
 then it is still further evident that the accounts in question are not true. For they were apparently none of them published in }{\i\f0 Judea,}{\f0  the scene of the events recorded in them. But it is pretty clear that they were written in countries }{
\i\f0 at a distance from Palestine.}{\f0  And the facts recorded in them were- no where so }{\i\f0 little believed}{\f0   as in Judea, among the people in whose sight they are said to have been wrought, where they ought, }{\i\f0 if true,}{\f0 
 to have met with most credit. It is, however, evident from the histories themselves, that these stories were
 laughed at, by the learned and intelligent of the Jewish nation, and disbelieved by the great body of the people. In truth the first Christians were merely one hundred and twenty Galilaeans, who asserted to their co-religionists, that Jesus of Nazareth w
as the ejected Messiah. It was a mere }{\i\f0 national quarrel}{\f0  between the great body of the Jews, and a few schismatics. This is evident from the Acts, where we find that for several years they confined their preaching to }{\i\f0 Jews only.}{\f0 
 Till the conversion of Corneliu
s, they do not appear to have thought the Gentiles any way interested in their dispute with their countrymen. So that it is not improbable, (as the Jewish Christians dwindled very rapidly,) that had it not been for the Gentile proselytes to Judaism, Chris
tianity would have perished in its cradle. These people were very numerous, and formed the connecting link between the Jews and the Gentiles. And it was through the medium of these people, that Christianity }{\i\f0 became known}{\f0 
 to the heathens.  For we find that after the apostles could make nothing of the stubborn Jews \ldblquote they shook their garments,  and told them that from henceforth }{\i\f0 we go to the Gentiles.\rdblquote \emdash  }{\f0 
Accordingly, when the apostles preached in the synagogues, and the Jews }{\i\f0 contradicted,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 blasphemed,\rdblquote }{\f0  and made fun of their mode of proving from the prophets, \ldblquote that Jesus was the Christ; yet the }{\i\f0 
\ldblquote proselytes}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 devout women\rdblquote }{\f0  listened, and believed.
\par 
\par 3. If \ldblquote  supposing the accounts to have the two foregoing qualifications, we still may suspect them to be false; if, in the time when, and in the place where, they took their rise, they might be suffered }{\i\f0 to pass without examination,
\rdblquote }{\f0  we have still less reason to believe the gospels. For one reason why they might be suffered to pass without examination is, where the mira
cles proposed coincided with the notions and superstitious prejudices of those whom they were reported, and who, }{\i\f0 on that account,}{\f0 
 might be prone to receive them unexamined. Now, we have documents in plenty, which abundantly prove, along with the virtues, the extreme credulity and simplicity of the Primitive Christians, whose maxim was, \ldblquote 
 believe, but do not examine, and thy faith shall save thee.\rdblquote  Another very good reason why they might be suffered to pass without, examination is, that the miracles of the gospels were entirely }{\i\f0 unknown}{\f0  to, or at least }{\i\f0 
acknowledged}{\f0  by, any }{\i\f0 heathen}{\f0  or }{\i\f0 Jew}{\f0  of }{\i\f0 the age in which they are recorded to have happened.}{\f0 
 Nobody seems to have known a syllable about them but the apostles and their converts. Even the books of the New Testame
nt were not generally known to the heathens until some hundred years after the birth of Jesus; and it seems from the few fragments of their works come down to us, that the only notice they did take of them, was to accuse them of telling lies and old wives
 fables. And as for the Jews, the origin and early propagation of Christianity was so very obscure, that those who lived nearest the times of the apostles, do not seem to have known any thing about them, or their doctrines.
\par 
\par Though a little out of place, yet I will here adduce a fact which illustrates and exemplifies the power of enthusiasm, to make people believe they saw what they did not see.  Lucian gives an account of one Peregrinus, a philosophist very famous in his tim
e
, who had a great number of disciples. He ended his life by throwing himself, in the presence of assembled thousands, into a burning pile.   Yet such was the enthusiastic veneration of his followers, that some of his disciples did solemnly aver, that they
 had seen him after his death, clothed in white, and crowned; and they were believed, insomuch that altars and statues were erected to Peregrinus as to a demi-god.
\par See Lucian\rquote s account.
\par 
\par APPENDIX B.
\par 
\par See Cotelerius \ldblquote  Patres Apostolic,\rdblquote  Tom. 1, p. 602.
\par Extract of a letter from Peter to James, prefixed to the Clementines.
\par \ldblquote For, if this be not done, (says Peter, after entreating James not to communicate }{\i\f0 his preachings}{\f0  to any Gentile without previous examination,) our speech of truth will be divided into many op
inions, nor do I know this thing as being a prophet, but as seeing even now the beginning of this evil. For some from among the Gentiles have rejected my }{\i\f0 legal}{\f0  preaching, embracing the }{\i\f0 trifling,}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 lawless}{\f0 
 doctrine of a man }{\i\f0 who is an enemy ;}{\f0  and these things, some have endeavoured to do now in my own lifetime, transforming my words by various interpretations, to }{\i\f0 the destruction of the Laws: as}{\f0  if I }{\i\f0 
had been of the same mind,}{\f0  but dared not openly profess it, (see Galatians ii. 11, }{\i\f0 12,}{\f0  &c.,) which be far from me! For this were to act against the law of God, spoken by Moses, and which has the testimony of our Lord }{\i\f0 
for its perpetual duration;}{\f0  since he thus has said, \ldblquote Heaven and earth shall pass away, yet one jot, or one tittle, shall not pass from the law.\rdblquote 
 But these, I know not how, promising to deliver my opinion, (see Galatians as above) take upon them to explain the words they heard from me, better than I that spoke them; telling their disciples, my sense was that of which I had not so much as 
thought. Now, if in my own life time, they dare feign such things, how much more will those that come after, do the same.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par APPENDIX C.
\par 
\par Extract from Dodwell\rquote s Dissertations on Irenaeus, Diss. 1, p.p. 38, 39.
\par 
\par \ldblquote The Canonical writings (i. e. of the New Testament), lay }{\i\f0 concealed}{\f0 
 in the coffers of private churches, or persons, till the latter times of Trajan, or rather perhaps of Adrian ; so that they could not come to the knowledge of the church. For if they had been published, they would have been overwhelme
d under such a multitude as were then of apocryphal and suppositious books, that a new examination and a new testimony would be necessary to distinguish them from these false ones. And it is from this new testimony (whereby the genuine writings of the apo
stles were distinguished from the spurious pieces which went under their names,) that }{\i\f0 depends all the authority }{\f0 which the truly apostolic writings have formerly obtained, or which }{\i\f0 they }{\f0 
have at present in the Catholic Church. But this fresh attestation of the canon is subject to the same inconveniences with those traditions of the ancient persons that I defend, and whom Irenaeus both heard and saw; for it }{\i\f0 is}{\f0 
 equally distant from the original, and could not be made except by such only as had reached those remote times. But it is very certain that before the period I mentioned of Trajan\rquote s time, the canon of the sacred books, was }{\i\f0 not yet fixed,}{
\f0  nor any }{\i\f0 certain number}{\f0  of books received in the Catholic Church, whose authority must ever after serve to determine matters of faith; neither were the spurious pieces of heretics }{\i\f0 yet rejected,}{\f0 
 nor were the faithful admonished to beware of them for the future. Likewise, the true writings of the apostles used to be so bound up in one volume }{\i\f0 with the apocryphal, }{\f0 that it was no
t manifest by any mark of public censure which of them should }{\i\f0 be preferred}{\f0 
 to the other. We have at this day, certain authentic writings of ecclesiastical authors of those times, as Clemens Romanus, Barnabas, Hermas, Ignatius, and Polycarp, who wrote in th
e same order wherein I have named them, and after all the other writers of the New Testament, except Jude, and the two Johns. But in Hermas }{\i\f0 you shall not meet with one passage, or any mention of the New Testament;}{\f0 
 nor in all the rest is any one of the evangelists called by his own name. And if sometimes they cite any passages like those we read in our gospels; yet, you will find them so much changed, and for the most part so interpolated, that }{\i\f0 
it cannot be known, }{\f0 whether they produced them out of }{\i\f0 ours,}{\f0  or some apocryphal gospels ; nay, they sometimes cite passages which it is most certain are }{\i\f0 not}{\f0 
 in the present gospels. From hence, therefore, it is evident that no difference was yet put between the apocryphal and canonical books of the New Testament, especia
lly if it be considered, that they pass no censure on the apocryphal, nor leave any mark whereby the reader might discern whether they attributed less authority to the spurious than to the genuine gospels; from whence it may reasonably be suspected, that 
if they cite sometimes any passages conformable to ours, it was not done through any certain design, as if dubious things were to be confirmed }{\i\f0 only}{\f0 
 by the canonical books, so as it is very possible that both those and the like passages may have been borrowe
d from other gospels besides these we now have. But what need I mention books that are not canonical, when indeed it does not appear from those of our canonical books which were last written, that the church knew any thing of the gospels, or that the cler
gy made a common use of them. The writers of these times do not chequer their works with texts of the New Testament, which yet is the custom of the moderns, and was also }{\i\f0 theirs}{\f0 
 in such books as they acknowledge for scripture; for they most frequently cite the books of the Old Testament, and would, doubtless, have done so by those of the New, if they had then been received as canonical.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par So far Mr. Dodwell, and (excepting the genuineness of the writings of Barnabas and the rest, for they are incontestably ancient,) it is certain that the }{\i\f0 matters of fact}{\f0 
 with regard to the New Testament are all true. Whoever has an inclination to write on this subject, is furnished from this passage with a great many curious disquisitions wherein to show his penetration and his judgment, as\emdash 
how the immediate successors and disciples of the apostles could so grossly confound the genuine writings of their masters with such as were falsely attributed to them; or since }{\i\f0 they}{\f0  were in the dark about these matters so early, how come su
ch as followed them, by a better light; why all those books which are cited by the earliest fathers with the same respect as those now received, should not be accounted }{\i\f0 equally}{\f0 
 authentic by them; and what stress should be laid on the testimony of those fat
hers, who not only contradict one another, but are often inconsistent with themselves, in relating the very same facts; with a great many other difficulties, which deserve a clear solution from any capable person.
\par 
\par I have said the ancient heretics asserted that the present gospels were }{\i\f0 forgeries.}{\f0  As an example of this, take the following, from the works of Faustus, quoted by Augustine, contra Faustum Lib. 32, c. 2. \ldblquote 
 You think, (says Faustus to his adversaries,) that of all the books in the world the Testament of the Son only, could not be corrupted; that it alone contains nothing which ought to be disallowed; especially when it appears, that it was not written }{
\i\f0 by the apostles,}{\f0  but }{\i\f0 a long time after them,}{\f0  by certain obscure persons, who, lest no credit shoul
d be given to the stories they told of what they could not know, did prefix, to their writings, the names of the apostles, and partly of those who succeeded the apostles, affirming, that what they wrote themselves, was written by these. Wherein they seem 
to me to have been the more heinously injurious to the disciples of Christ, by attributing to them what they wrote themselves so }{\i\f0 dissonant}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 repugnant;}{\f0 
 and that they pretended to write those gospels under their names, which are so full of }{\i\f0 mistakes,}{\f0  of }{\i\f0 contradictory relations}{\f0  and }{\i\f0 opinions,}{\f0  that they are neither }{\i\f0 coherent with themselves,}{\f0 
 nor consistent }{\i\f0 with one another.}{\f0  What is this, therefore, but to throw a calumny on good men, and to fix the accusation of }{\i\f0 discord}{\f0  on the unanimous society of Christ\rquote s disciples.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par ADDENDA.
\par 
\par There is, in the Gospel ascribed to John, a passage, quoted as a prophecy, which, as it has been looked on as a proof text, ought to have been mentioned in the 7th chapter. It is this. The evangelist (John xix. 23) says, \ldblquote  Then the soldie
rs, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also his coat\emdash now }{\i\f0 the coat}{\f0  was without seam, woven from the top throughout. They said, therefore, among themselves, \lquote 
 Let us not }{\i\f0 rend it,}{\f0  but cast lots for it\rquote ; that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which saith, \lquote They parted my raiment among them and for my }{\i\f0 vesture}{\f0  they did cast lots.\rquote   \ldblquote 
Now, however plausible this }{\i\f0 prophesy}{\f0  may appear, it is one of the most impudent applications of passages from the Old 
Testament that occurs in the New. It is taken from the 18th verse of the 22d Psalm, which Psalm was probably made by David, in reference to his humiliating and wretched expulsion from Jerusalem by his son Absalom, and what was done in consequence, viz., t
hat he was hunted by ferocious enemies, whom he compares to furious bulls, and roaring lions, gaping upon him to devour him; that his palace was }{\i\f0 plundered,}{\f0  and that }{\i\f0 they divided his treasured garments,}{\f0 
 (in the East, where the fashions never change, every great man has constantly presses full of hundreds and thousands of garments, many of them very costly: they are considered as a valuable part of his riches), }{\i\f0 and }{\f0 cast lots }{\i\f0 
for his robes.}{\f0  This is the real meaning of this passage quoted as a prophecy. In the same Psalm, there is another verse, which has been from time immemorial quoted as a prophecy of the crucifixion, (v. 16,) \ldblquote  They }{\i\f0 pierced}{\f0 
 my hands and my feet.\rdblquote  In the original, there seems to have been a word dropped importing \ldblquote  they tear,\rdblquote  or something like it, for it is literally, \ldblquote Like a lion\emdash my hands and my feet,\rdblquote  and there is }
{\i\f0 there}{\f0  no word answering to \ldblquote  pierced.\rdblquote  The meaning, however, of the verse is not difficult to be discerned, \ldblquote  dogs have compassed me; the assembly of wicked men have enclosed me; like a lion\emdash 
(they tear) my hands and my feet.\rdblquote  The meaning may be discovered from the context, where David represents himself as in the utmost distress, helpless, and abandoned amidst his enemies, raging like wild beasts around him; then, by a strong, but s
triking Oriental figure, he represents himself like a carcass surrounded by dogs, who are busied in tearing the flesh from his bones; their teeth }{\i\f0 fixed in his hands and feet, and pulling him asunder.}{\f0 
 This is the import of the place, and this interpretation is at last adopted, for the first time, I believe, by Christians, in the new version of the Psalms used by the Unitarian Church in London.
\par 
\par There is not a more palpable instance of the facility with which good natured and voracious piety is made to swallo
w the most flimsy arguments, if only agreeable to its wishes and wants, than the case under consideration. This Psalm, containing these passages, \ldblquote  they parted my raiment among them;\rdblquote  and \ldblquote  they pierced my hands and my feet,
\rdblquote  is read, and for ages has been read, in the name of God, to the good people of the Church of England, on every Good Friday, as undoubtedly }{\i\f0 a prophesy}{\f0 
 of the Crucifixion; when yet the learned divines of the Church of England (and of these it can boast a noble Catalogue indeed) certainly
 know, and are conscious that the Psalm, which contains these passages, has no more relation to Jesus, than it has to Nebuchadnezzar.
\par 
\par A reference ought to have been subjoined at the end of the 10th chapter to the dialogue, called \ldblquote  Philopatris\rdblquote  in Lucian\rquote 
s Works, for an account of the customs, habits, and personal appearance of the early Christians, corroborative of what is said in the 17th and 18th chapters of this work. Lest, however, Lucian\rquote 
s testimony in this matter should be objected to, because he was a satirist, and, of course, may have been guilty of giving an overcharged picture of the subjects of his ridicule, I request the reader to peruse, if he can obtain it, \ldblquote  Lami
\rquote s Account of the domestic habits and personal appearance and practices of the primitive Christians.\rdblquote 
 Lami was a very learned and sincere Christian, and of course his testimony cannot be objected to, and the reader will find, on a perusal of his work, that what I have asserted in the 17th and 18th chapters is altogether true, and not 
the whole truth neither. Indeed, that the statements in those chapters, as to the effects of the }{\i\f0 peculiar}{\f0 
 maxims of the New Testament upon the heart and understanding, are substantially correct, will, I believe, be discovered by asking any honest individua
l among the Methodists, who is an enthusiast, i. e sincere, and thorough-going in his religion. I have no doubt that he or she will avow, without hesitation, to the enquirer, and glory in it, that chastity is more honourable than marriage; that faith is e
very thing; that doubt is damnable, and a proof of \ldblquote  an unregenerated  mind;\rdblquote  that all the goods and pleasures of this world are \ldblquote trash;\rdblquote  that human institutions are mere \ldblquote  carnal ordinances ;\rdblquote 
 and that human science and learning is a snare to faith and an abomination to a true disciple of the cross.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\f0 
\par 
\par End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Grounds of Christianity Examined
\par by Comparing The New Testament with the Old, by George Bethune English
\par 
\par *** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GROUNDS OF CHRISTIANITY ***
\par 
\par ***** This file should be named 1}{\f0 5968-r.rtf or 15968-r}{\f0 .zip *****
\par This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
\par         http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/9/6/15968/
\par 
\par Produced by Charles Klingman
\par 
\par Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
\par will be renamed.
\par 
\par Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
\par one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
\par (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
\par permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
\par set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
\par copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
\par protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
\par Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
\par charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
\par do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
\par rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
\par such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
\par research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
\par practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
\par subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
\par redistribution.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par *** START: FULL LICENSE ***
\par 
\par THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
\par PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
\par 
\par To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
\par distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
\par (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
\par Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
\par Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
\par http://gutenberg.net/license).
\par 
\par 
\par Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
\par electronic works
\par 
\par 1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
\par electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
\par and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
\par (trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
\par the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
\par all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
\par If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
\par Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
\par terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
\par entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
\par 
\par 1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
\par used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
\par agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
\par things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
\par even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
\par paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
\par Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
\par and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
\par works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
\par 
\par 1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
\par or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
\par Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
\par collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
\par individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
\par located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
\par copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
\par works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
\par are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
\par Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
\par freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
\par this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
\par the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
\par keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
\par Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
\par 
\par 1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
\par what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
\par a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
\par the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
\par before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
\par creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
\par Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
\par the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
\par States.
\par 
\par 1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
\par 
\par 1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
\par access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
\par whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
\par phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
\par Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
\par copied or distributed:
\par 
\par This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
\par almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
\par re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
\par with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net
\par 
\par 1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
\par from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
\par posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
\par and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
\par or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
\par with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
\par work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
\par through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
\par Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
\par 1.E.9.
\par 
\par 1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
\par with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
\par must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
\par terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
\par to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
\par permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
\par 
\par 1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
\par License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
\par work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
\par 
\par 1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
\par electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
\par prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
\par active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
\par Gutenberg-tm License.
\par 
\par 1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
\par compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
\par word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
\par distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
\par "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
\par posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
\par you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
\par copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
\par request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
\par form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
\par License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
\par 
\par 1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
\par performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
\par unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
\par 
\par 1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
\par access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
\par that
\par 
\par - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
\par      the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
\par      you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
\par      owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
\par      has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
\par      Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
\par      must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
\par      prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
\par      returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
\par      sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
\par      address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
\par      the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
\par 
\par - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
\par      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
\par      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
\par      License.  You must require such a user to return or
\par      destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
\par      and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
\par      Project Gutenberg-tm works.
\par 
\par - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
\par      money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
\par      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
\par      of receipt of the work.
\par 
\par - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
\par      distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
\par 
\par 1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
\par electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
\par forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
\par both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
\par Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
\par Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
\par 
\par 1.F.
\par 
\par 1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
\par effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
\par public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
\par collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
\par works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
\par "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
\par corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
\par property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
\par computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
\par your equipment.
\par 
\par 1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
\par of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
\par Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
\par Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
\par Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
\par liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
\par fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
\par LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
\par PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
\par TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
\par LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
\par INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
\par DAMAGE.
\par 
\par 1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
\par defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
\par receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
\par written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
\par received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
\par your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
\par the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
\par refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
\par providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
\par receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
\par is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
\par opportunities to fix the problem.
\par 
\par 1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
\par in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
\par WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
\par WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
\par 
\par 1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
\par warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
\par If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
\par law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
\par interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
\par the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
\par provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
\par 
\par 1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
\par trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
\par providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
\par with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
\par promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
\par harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
\par that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
\par or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
\par work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
\par Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
\par 
\par 
\par Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
\par 
\par Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
\par electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
\par including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
\par because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
\par people in all walks of life.
\par 
\par Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
\par assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
\par goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
\par remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
\par Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
\par and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
\par To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
\par and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
\par and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
\par 
\par 
\par Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
\par Foundation
\par 
\par The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
\par 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
\par state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
\par Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
\par number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
\par http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
\par Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
\par permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
\par 
\par The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
\par Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
\par throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
\par 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
\par business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
\par information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
\par page at http://pglaf.org
\par 
\par For additional contact information:
\par      Dr. Gregory B. Newby
\par      Chief Executive and Director
\par      gbnewby@pglaf.org
\par 
\par 
\par Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
\par Literary Archive Foundation
\par 
\par Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
\par spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
\par increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
\par freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
\par array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
\par ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
\par status with the IRS.
\par 
\par The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
\par charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
\par States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
\par considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
\par with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
\par where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
\par SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
\par particular state visit http://pglaf.org
\par 
\par While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
\par have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
\par against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
\par approach us with offers to donate.
\par 
\par International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
\par any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
\par outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
\par 
\par Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
\par methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
\par ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
\par donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
\par 
\par 
\par Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
\par works.
\par 
\par Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
\par concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
\par with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
\par Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
\par 
\par 
\par Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
\par editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
\par unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
\par keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
\par 
\par 
\par Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
\par 
\par      http://www.gutenberg.net
\par 
\par This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
\par including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
\par Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
\par subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
\par }{\f0 
\par }}